---
layout: post
title: '`[[trivial_abi]]` 101'
date: 2018-05-02 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  attributes
  copy-elision
  llvm
  sg14
---

Finally, a blog post on `[[trivial_abi]]`!

This is a brand-new feature in Clang trunk, new as of about February 2018.
It is a *vendor extension* to the C++ language — it is not
standard C++, it isn't supported by GCC trunk, and there is no active WG21 proposal
to add it to the standard C++ language, as far as I know.

Full disclosure: I am totally **not** involved in the implementation of this
feature. I'm just watching its patches go by on the `cfe-commits` mailing list
and applauding quietly to myself. But this is such a cool feature that I think
everyone should know about it.

Okay, first of all, since this is a non-standard attribute, Clang trunk doesn't
actually support it under the *standard attribute* spelling `[[trivial_abi]]`.
Instead, you must spell it old-style as one of the following:

* `__attribute__((trivial_abi))`
* `__attribute__((__trivial_abi__))`
* `[[clang::trivial_abi]]`

Also, being an attribute, the compiler will be *super picky* about where you
put it — and passive-aggressively quiet if you accidentally put it in the
wrong place (because unrecognized attributes are supposed to be quietly
ignored). This is one of those "it's a feature, not a bug!" situations.
So the proper syntax, all in one place, is:

    #define TRIVIAL_ABI __attribute__((trivial_abi))

    class TRIVIAL_ABI Widget {
        // ...
    };


## What is the problem being solved?

Remember [my blog post from 2018-04-17](/blog/2018/04/17/downsides-of-omitting-trivial-destructor-calls)
where I showed two versions of a class (there called `Integer`):

    struct Foo {
        int value;
        ~Foo() = default; // trivial
    };

    struct Bar {
        int value;
        ~Bar() {} // deliberately non-trivial
    };

In that post's particular code snippet, the compiler produced
worse codegen for `Foo` than it did for `Bar`. This was worth blogging
about because it was *surprising*. Programmers intuitively
expect that the "trivial" code will do better than the "non-trivial" code.
In most situations, this is true. Specifically, this is true when we go to
do a function call or return:

    template<class T>
    T incr(T obj) {
        obj.value += 1;
        return obj;
    }

[`incr<Foo>` compiles into the following code:](https://godbolt.org/g/aeM6Up)

    leal   1(%rdi), %eax
    retq

(`leal` is [x86-speak for "add"](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6323027/lea-or-add-instruction).)
We can see that our 4-byte `obj` will be passed in to `incr<Foo>`
in the `%edi` register; and then we'll add 1 to its value and return it
in `%eax`. Four bytes in, four bytes out, easy peasy.

Now look at `incr<Bar>` (the case with the non-trivial destructor).

    movl   (%rsi), %eax
    addl   $1, %eax
    movl   %eax, (%rsi)
    movl   %eax, (%rdi)
    movq   %rdi, %rax
    retq

Here, `obj` is *not* being passed in a register, even though it's the same 4 bytes
with all the same semantics. Here, `obj` is being passed and returned by address.
So our caller has set up some space for the return value and given us a pointer
to that space in `%rdi`; and our caller has given us a pointer to the value of `obj`
in the next argument register `%rsi`. We *fetch* the value from `(%rsi)`,
add 1 to it, store it back into `(%rsi)` (so as to update the value of `obj` itself),
and then (trivially) copy the 4 bytes of `obj` into the return slot pointed to
by `%rdi`. Finally, we copy the caller's original pointer `%rdi` into `%rax`,
because [the x86-64 ABI document](https://www.uclibc.org/docs/psABI-x86_64.pdf)
(page 22) says we have to.

The reason `Bar` behaves so differently from `Foo` is that `Bar` has a non-trivial
destructor, and [the x86-64 ABI document](https://www.uclibc.org/docs/psABI-x86_64.pdf)
(page 19) says specifically:

> If a C++ object has either a non-trivial copy constructor or a non-trivial
> destructor, it is passed by invisible reference (the object is replaced in
> the parameter list by a pointer [...]).

The later [Itanium C++ ABI document](https://itanium-cxx-abi.github.io/cxx-abi/abi.html#non-trivial)
defines a term of art:

> If the parameter type is _non-trivial for the purposes of calls_,
> the caller must allocate space for a temporary and pass that temporary
> by reference.
>
> [...]
>
> A type is considered _non-trivial for the purposes of calls_ if:
>
> * it has a non-trivial copy constructor, move constructor, or destructor, or
> * all of its copy and move constructors are deleted.

So that explains it: `Bar` gets worse codegen because it is passed by
invisible reference. It is passed by invisible reference because of the
unfortunate conjunction of two _independent_ premises:

* the ABI document says that things with non-trivial destructors are passed by invisible reference, and
* `Bar` has a non-trivial destructor.

By the way, this is a classical [syllogism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syllogism):
the first bullet point above is the _major premise_, and the second is the
_minor premise_. The conclusion is "`Bar` is passed by invisible reference."

Suppose someone presents us with the syllogism

* All men are mortal.
* Socrates is a man.
* Therefore Socrates is mortal.

If we wish to quibble with the conclusion "Socrates is mortal", we must
rebut one of the premises: either rebut the major premise
(maybe some men aren't mortal) or rebut the minor premise (maybe Socrates
isn't a man).

To get `Bar` to be passed in registers (just like `Foo`), we must rebut
one or the other of our two premises. The standard-C++ way to do it is
simply to give `Bar` a trivial destructor, negating the minor premise.
But there is another way!


## How `[[trivial_abi]]` solves the problem

Clang's new `trivial_abi` attribute negates the *major* premise above.
Clang *extends the ABI document* to say essentially the following:

> If the parameter type is _non-trivial for the purposes of calls_,
> the caller must allocate space for a temporary and pass that temporary
> by reference.
>
> [...]
>
> A type is considered non-trivial for the purposes of calls
> _if it has not been marked `[[trivial_abi]]`_ AND:
>
> * it has a non-trivial copy constructor, move constructor, or destructor, or
> * all of its copy and move constructors are deleted.

That is, even a class type *with* a non-trivial move constructor or destructor
will be considered trivial for the purposes of calls, *if* it has been
marked by the programmer as `[[trivial_abi]]`.

So now (using Clang trunk) we can go back and write this:

    #define TRIVIAL_ABI __attribute__((trivial_abi))

    struct TRIVIAL_ABI Baz {
        int value;
        ~Baz() {} // deliberately non-trivial
    };

and compile `incr<Baz>`, and [we get the same code](https://godbolt.org/g/z14owu)
as `incr<Foo>`!


## Caveat #1: `[[trivial_abi]]` is sometimes a no-op

I would hope that we could make "trivial-for-purposes-of-calls" wrappers
around standard library types like this:

    template<class T, class D>
    struct TRIVIAL_ABI trivial_unique_ptr : std::unique_ptr<T, D> {
        using std::unique_ptr<T, D>::unique_ptr;
    };

Unfortunately, this doesn't work. If your class has any *base classes*
or *non-static data members* which are themselves "non-trivial for purposes
of calls", then Clang's extension as currently written will make your class
sort of "irreversibly non-trivial" — the attribute will have no effect.
(It will not be diagnosed. This means you can use `[[trivial_abi]]` on a
class template such as `optional` and have it be "conditionally trivial",
which is sometimes a useful feature. The downside, of course, is that you
might mark a class trivial and then find out later that the compiler was
giving you the silent treatment.)

The attribute will also be silently ignored if your class has *virtual* bases
or virtual member functions. In these cases it probably won't even fit in a
register anyway, and I don't know what you're doing passing it around by
value, but, just so you know.

So, as far as I know, the only ways to use `TRIVIAL_ABI` on "standard utility types"
such as `optional<T>`, `unique_ptr<T>`, and `shared_ptr<T>` are

* implement them from scratch yourself and apply the attribute, or
* break into your local libc++ and apply the attribute by hand there.

(In the open-source world, these are essentially the same thing anyway.)


## Caveat #2: Destructor responsibility

In our `Foo`/`Bar` example, the class had a no-op destructor. Suppose we
gave our class a *really* non-trivial destructor?

    struct Up1 {
        int value;
        Up1(Up1&& u) : value(u.value) { u.value = 0; }
        ~Up1() { puts("destroyed"); }
    };

This should look familiar; it's `unique_ptr<int>` stripped to its
bare essentials, and with `printf` standing in for `delete`.

Without `TRIVIAL_ABI`, `incr<Up1>` looks just like `incr<Bar>`:

    movl   (%rsi), %eax
    addl   $1, %eax
    movl   %eax, (%rdi)
    movl   $0, (%rsi)
    movq   %rdi, %rax
    retq

[With `TRIVIAL_ABI` added, `incr<Up2>` looks much bigger and scarier!](https://godbolt.org/g/G9Ficq)

    pushq  %rbx
    leal   1(%rdi), %ebx
    movl   $.L.str, %edi
    callq  puts
    movl   %ebx, %eax
    popq   %rbx
    retq

Under the traditional calling convention, types with non-trivial destructors
are always passed by invisible reference, which means that the callee (`incr`
in our case) always receives a pointer to a parameter object that *it does not own*.
The caller owns the parameter object. This is what makes [copy elision](/blog/2018/03/29/the-superconstructing-super-elider/)
work!

When a type with `[[trivial_abi]]` is passed in registers, we are essentially
*making a copy* of the parameter object. There is only one return register on
x86-64 (handwave), so the callee has no way to give that object *back* to us
when it's finished. The callee must take ownership of the parameter object
we gave it! Which means that the callee must call the destructor of the
parameter object when it's finished with it.

In our previous `Foo`/`Bar`/`Baz` examples, this destructor call was happening,
but it was a no-op, so we didn't notice. Now in `incr<Up2>` we see the additional
code that is produced by a callee-side destructor.

It is conceivable that this extra code could add up, in certain use-cases.

However, counterpoint: this destructor call is not appearing out of nowhere!
It is being called in `incr` because it is *not* being called in `incr`'s caller.
So in general the costs and benefits might be expected to balance out.


## Caveat #3: Destructor ordering

The destructor for the trivial-abi parameter will be called by the callee, not the caller
(Caveat 2). Richard Smith points out that this means it will be called *out of order*
with respect to the other parameters' destructors.

    struct TRIVIAL_ABI alpha {
        alpha() { puts("alpha constructed"); }
        ~alpha() { puts("alpha destroyed"); }
    };
    struct beta {
        beta() { puts("beta constructed"); }
        ~beta() { puts("beta destroyed"); }
    };
    void foo(alpha, beta) {}
    int main() {
        foo(alpha{}, beta{});
    }

This code prints

    alpha constructed
    beta constructed
    alpha destroyed
    beta destroyed

when `TRIVIAL_ABI` is defined as `[[clang::trivial_abi]]`, and prints

    alpha constructed
    beta constructed
    beta destroyed
    alpha destroyed

when `TRIVIAL_ABI` is defined away. Only the latter — with destruction in
reverse order of construction — is C++-standard-conforming.


## Relation to "trivially relocatable" / "move-relocates"

None... well, some?

As you can see, there is no *requirement* that a `[[trivial_abi]]` class type
should have any particular semantics for its move constructor, its destructor,
or its default constructor. Any given class type will *likely* be trivially
relocatable, simply because most class types are trivially relocatable by
accident.


We can easily design an `offset_ptr` which is
*super duper non-trivially* relocatable:

    template<class T>
    class TRIVIAL_ABI offset_ptr {
        intptr_t value_;
    public:
        offset_ptr(T *p) : value_((const char*)p - (const char*)this) {}
        offset_ptr(const offset_ptr& rhs) : value_((const char*)rhs.get() - (const char*)this) {}
        T *get() const { return (T *)((const char *)this + value_); }
        offset_ptr& operator=(const offset_ptr& rhs) {
            value_ = ((const char*)rhs.get() - (const char*)this);
            return *this;
        }
        offset_ptr& operator+=(int diff) {
            value_ += (diff * sizeof (T));
            return *this;
        }
    };

    int main() {
        offset_ptr<int> top = &a[4];
        top = incr(top);
        assert(top.get() == &a[5]);
    }

[Here's the full code](/blog/code/2018-05-02-trivial-offset-ptr.cpp).

With `TRIVIAL_ABI` defined, Clang trunk passes this test at `-O0` or `-O1`, but at `-O2` (i.e., as soon
as it tries to inline the calls to `trivial_offset_ptr::operator+=` and
the copy constructor) it fails the assertion.

So there's a caveat here too. If your type is doing something crazy with
the `this` pointer, you probably don't want to be passing it in registers.

[Filed 37319, essentially a documentation request.](https://bugs.llvm.org/show_bug.cgi?id=37319)
In this case, it turns out there's just no way to make the code do what the programmer intends.
We're saying that the
value of `value_` should depend on the value of the `this` pointer; but
at the caller–callee boundary, the object is in a register and there *is*
no `this` pointer! So when the callee spills it back to memory and gives it
a `this` pointer again, how should the callee compute the correct value to
put into `value_`? Maybe the better question is,
[how does it even work at `-O0`? It shouldn't work at all.](http://plasmasturm.org/log/6debug/)

So anyway, if you're going to use `[[trivial_abi]]`, you must avoid having
member functions (not just special member functions, but *any* member functions)
that significantly depend on the object's own address (for some hand-wavy value of
"significantly").

The intuition here is that when a thing is marked `[[trivial_abi]]`, then any time
you expect a *copy* you might actually get a *copy plus `memcpy`*: The "put it in a register
and then take it back out" operation is essentially tantamount to `memcpy`. And similarly
when you expect a *move* you might actually get a *move plus `memcpy`*.

Whereas, when a type is "trivially relocatable" (according to my definition from
[this C++Now talk](https://cppnow2018.sched.com/event/EC77/the-best-type-traits-that-c-doesnt-have)),
then any time you expect a *copy and destroy* you might actually get a *`memcpy`*. And similarly
when you expect a *move and destroy* you might actually get a *`memcpy`*. You actually *lose* calls
to special member functions when you're talking about "trivial relocation"; whereas with the
Clang `[[trivial_abi]]` attribute you never lose calls. You just get (as if) `memcpy` *in addition to* the
calls you expected. This (as if) `memcpy` is the price you pay for a faster, register-based calling
convention.


## Further reading

* [Akira Hatanaka's cfe-dev thread from November 2017](http://lists.llvm.org/pipermail/cfe-dev/2017-November/thread.html#55955)
* [Official Clang documentation](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#trivial-abi-clang-trivial-abi)
* [The unit tests for trivial_abi](https://github.com/llvm-mirror/clang/blob/master/test/CodeGenCXX/trivial_abi.cpp)
* [Bug 37319: trivial_offset_ptr can't possibly work](https://bugs.llvm.org/show_bug.cgi?id=37319)
