---
layout: post
title: "’Ware Wire"
date: 2018-06-20 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  litclub
---

Following [the other day's post about "Naming of Parts"](/blog/2018/06/17/piling-swivel),
I spent a good part of the rest of the day reading poetry from the World Wars. I learned
that [Henry Reed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Reed_(poet)) wrote several war poems,
collectively titled _Lessons of War_, of which "Naming of Parts" was merely the most famous.
(The others are also quite good.)

I also learned that when Wilfred Owen dedicated his poem "Dulce et Decorum Est" to "a certain Poetess,"
the poetess he had in mind was [Jessie Pope](https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-32298697), who wrote poems
in the vein of ["’Ware Wire!" (1915)](https://archive.org/details/jessiepopeswarpo00popeiala):

> When the beagles are running like steam,  
> When the plough is as sticky as glue,  
> When the scent is an absolute scream,  
> And there's wire in the fence to get through—  
> Who waits to look after his pal?  
> Hung up?— then he's out of the fun.  
> Torn, muddy, and blown, every man on his own—  
> That's the time-honoured rule of the run.  
>
> There's wire in the fences of France.  
> There are bullets that whistle and spit.  
> The word goes along to advance,  
> And the wire clutches somebody's kit.  
> "Hold hard! I'll unhook you, old chap.  
> No hurry. — Oh, rubbish! — What rot!" 
> Shots patter and thud, shells burst in the mud.  
> "Don't pull! Now, you're clear— no, you're not!'  
>
> Well, that's how the business is done.  
> A sportsman will brook no delay,  
> With hounds it's life and death run,  
> He's out for himself all the way.  
> But when black Eternity gapes  
> There's time and there's patience enough.  
> A case of ’ware wire, and a pal under fire—   
> "No hurry"— that's British-made stuff!  

Owen describes the horrors of the trenches
[in less sanguine terms](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/46560/dulce-et-decorum-est):

> Bent double, like old beggars under sacks,  
> Knock-kneed, coughing like hags, we cursed through sludge,  
> Till on the haunting flares we turned our backs,  
> And towards our distant rest began to trudge.  
> Men marched asleep. Many had lost their boots,  
> But limped on, blood-shod. All went lame; all blind;  
> Drunk with fatigue; deaf even to the hoots  
> Of gas-shells dropping softly behind.  
>
> Gas! <b>Gas!</b> Quick, boys!—An ecstasy of fumbling  
> Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time,  
> But someone still was yelling out and stumbling  
> And flound’ring like a man in fire or lime.—  
> Dim through the misty panes and thick green light,  
> As under a green sea, I saw him drowning.  
>
> In all my dreams before my helpless sight,  
> He plunges at me, guttering, choking, drowning.  
>
> If in some smothering dreams, you too could pace  
> Behind the wagon that we flung him in,  
> And watch the white eyes writhing in his face,  
> His hanging face, like a devil’s sick of sin;  
> If you could hear, at every jolt, the blood  
> Come gargling from the froth-corrupted lungs,  
> Obscene as cancer, bitter as the cud  
> Of vile, incurable sores on innocent tongues,—  
> My friend, you would not tell with such high zest  
> To children ardent for some desperate glory,  
> The old Lie: _Dulce et decorum est_  
> _Pro patria mori._  

"Out of the fun," indeed.
