---
layout: post
title: 'Avoid ADL calls to functions with common names'
date: 2018-06-17 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  argument-dependent-lookup
  customization-points
  hyperrogue
  pitfalls
  war-stories
---

I just ran into a thought-provoking little issue in the source code of
HyperRogue, and I thought I'd share it here.

[HyperRogue](https://github.com/zenorogue/hyperrogue) is quite possibly [the
most mind-expanding roguelike in existence](https://web.archive.org/web/20171004073813/https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2017/09/28/hyperrogue-non-euclidean-roguelike/).
And it's written 100% in C++! Even the web version is
compiled with [Emscripten](http://kripken.github.io/emscripten-site/docs/getting_started/Tutorial.html).
Okay, there's about 2000 lines of Java for the Android version, but the
bulk of the code — 135,000 lines — is C++.

The code's native language is C++11; that is, it uses lots of C++11 (`unordered_map`,
`std::move`, variadic templates) but it doesn't use any C++14 features (it used one
generic lambda for a while, but I submitted a patch to remove it, and the patch was
accepted). So it's C++11, and _also_ it's C++14.

But it's not _quite_ C++17.

Because it does this:

    using namespace std;

    template<class T> int size(const T& x) {
        return x.size();
    }

And then it does things like this:

    for(int i=0; i<size(cl.lst); i++)
      vptr[cl.lst[i]] = addRugpoint(shmup::ggmatrix(cl.lst[i])*C0, cl.dists[i]);

Okay, it's C++11, but it's not quite _idiomatic_ C++11. It's quite dense, and has a bit of a phobia
about ranged for-loops.

But then, everyone's codebase has its idiosyncrasies. When the end result
is [this good](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a7QO9sypSfM&t=5m29s), you can't complain too much
about the author's whitespace.


## So what's the problem?

The problem is that C++17 introduces `std::size`. So Clang complains:

    ./rug.cpp:585:18: error: call to 'size' is ambiguous
      for(int i=0; i<size(cl.lst); i++)
                     ^~~~
    /usr/include/c++/v1/iterator:1584:16: note: candidate
          function [with _Cont = std::__1::vector<hr::cell *, std::__1::allocator<hr::cell *> >]
    constexpr auto size(const _Cont& __c) -> decltype(__c.size()) { return __c.size(); }
                   ^
    ./hyper.h:400:23: note: candidate function [with T = std::__1::vector<hr::cell *, std::__1::allocator<hr::cell *> >]
    template<class T> int size(const T& x) {return x.size(); }
                          ^

Clang complains about 600 times:

    $ git grep '[^.>a-zA-Z0-9_]size(' | wc -l
         587

So the author tried [replacing `using namespace std;` with a list of explicit `using`-directives](https://github.com/zenorogue/hyperrogue/commit/d3200253db6866ed278540e136a7464e14c1d11a).
Unfortunately, this doesn't help. We're getting something we don't expect out of `namespace std`,
but it's not because we `using`ed the namespace. It's because of [argument-dependent lookup (ADL)](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/adl).
We made an unqualified call to `size`, where one of the arguments was a `std::vector`. This unqualified call,
by ADL, naturally finds any function named `size` in any *associated namespace* of the argument type
`std::vector` (and, incidentally, also considers namespace `hr`, although
[this has been widely regarded as a bad move](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2018/p0934r0.pdf).)

So eliminating the `using namespace std;` directive is a great idea but doesn't help at all.


## Possible solutions

I thought of a bunch of alternatives.

(A), we could change the name of our `size` function from `size` to `Size` (or `sz`, or `hrsize`, or whatever).
Update all the call-sites, and we're done. This continues performing ADL on every call-site, but now ADL
doesn't find any functions named `Size` (or whatever) *except* for the one we intend, so we're good.

    for(int i=0; i<Size(cl.lst); i++)

----

(B), we could leave our `size` function alone, and fully-qualify every *call* to it:

    for(int i=0; i<::size(cl.lst); i++)

This says, "Please look *only* in the global namespace for `size`" — that is, it turns off ADL entirely.
So we're good.

Minor digression: Super C++ geeks might have noticed that `<:` is a [digraph](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/operator_alternative),
so that in C++03 the above code would have been parsed as a syntax error:

    for(int i=0; i[:size(cl.lst); i++)

This has been fixed since C++11: `<::` is a sort of a "trigraph" that overrides the usual meaning
of `<:` in the same way as `<:` overrides the usual meaning of `<`. The underlying mechanism is similar
to how C++11 doesn't get confused by the `>>` in `set<set<int>>`.

----

(C), we could simply ifdef out our global `size` whenever we're in C++17 mode. Then our call sites will
do ADL lookup on `size`, and find only *one* candidate: `std::size`. So they'll be happy. But this
comes with two downsides.

First, it's surprisingly hard to detect "C++17 mode" in this case. The system Clang on my MacBook
doesn't support `-std=c++17` yet; it only has `-std=c++1z`, which doesn't increase the value of
the `__cplusplus` macro. So we can't reliably test for `__cplusplus >= 201703L`. But we can work around
this by adding a config macro <span style="white-space: nowrap;">`-DUSE_STDSIZE`</span> or whatever.

Second, HyperRogue's global function template `size` is not a drop-in replacement for `std::size`!
`std::size` returns `size_t`; our global `size` returns `int`.

    ./rug.cpp:585:17: warning: comparison of integers of different signs: 'int' and 'decltype(__c.size())' (aka 'unsigned long') [-Wsign-compare]
      for(int i=0; i<size(cl.lst); i++)
                   ~^~~~~~~~~~~~~

We could work around *that* by passing `-Wno-sign-compare`, but then we'd miss bugs.
Or we could add an explicit cast to `int` in any of several ways:

      for(int i=0; i<(int)size(cl.lst); i++)

      for(int i=0; i<int(size(cl.lst)); i++)

      for(int i=0; i<static_cast<int>(size(cl.lst)); i++)

Notice that we'd need to add those explicit casts even in places the compiler *didn't* complain.
Otherwise Murphy's Law says that we'd hit at least one instance of something like this:

    auto i = size(vec);
    double d = foo();
    double negated_if_empty = d * (i - 1);

And we don't want to audit all 587 call-sites looking for things like that.

----

(D) — an improvement on (C) — we could eliminate our global `size` *and* all its call-sites.
Just inline what it would have done, in C++17 and C++11 alike.

      for(int i=0; i<(int)cl.lst.size(); i++)

This is my preferred solution, since it turns out that we can implement it as a series of
mechanical replacements using `sed`:

    sed -i -e 's/size(\*it)/it->size()/g' langen.cpp
    sed -i -e 's/\([^a-z]\)size(\([a-zA-Z0-9_.:][][a-zA-Z0-9_.:]*\))/\1(int)\2.size()/g' `find . -name '*.cpp'` *.h
    sed -i -e 's/\([^a-z]\)size(\([a-zA-Z0-9_.:]*->[a-zA-Z0-9_.:][][a-zA-Z0-9_.:]*\))/\1(int)\2.size()/g' *.cpp
    sed -i -e 's/size(currentmap->allcells())/(int)currentmap->allcells().size()/g' *.cpp

This does introduce a lot of redundancy; for example, it rewrites

    if(size(str) == 0) return 0;

into

    if((int)str.size() == 0) return 0;

when a human being would have rewritten it as

    if(str.empty()) return 0;

But at least it gets the thing compiling in C++17 mode without breaking C++11 mode, and
we can go back and fix up individual call-sites on an ad-hoc basis the next time that particular
area of the code is being worked on.

----

(E), we could do that ad-hoc work right now. For example, our original example

    for(int i=0; i<size(cl.lst); i++)
      vptr[cl.lst[i]] = addRugpoint(shmup::ggmatrix(cl.lst[i])*C0, cl.dists[i]);

could be rewritten by hand into

    for (auto ld : hr::zip(cl.lst, cl.dists)) {
      vptr[ld[0]] = addRugpoint(shmup::ggmatrix(ld[0])*C0, ld[1]);
    }

with an [appropriate definition](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/8511035/sequence-zip-function-for-c11)
of `zip`. (And notice that we're `::`-qualifying the call, so that we won't have to
do this whole thing over again when `std::zip` inevitably arrives in a future standard!)

But this is basically saying "let's do a code audit on 587 ad-hoc call sites," which
isn't super enticing.


## Don't do that then

In our case we actually got *lucky* that our code failed to compile.
The absolute worst case would have been if our global `size` (returning a signed type)
were *silently a worse match* than C++17's `std::size` (returning an unsigned type),
so that all our math silently went wrong.

Unfortunately, C++ doesn't have a really great solution here. Future standards can add
names into `namespace std`, which can then break your existing code's unqualified calls
by causing unwanted ADL.

The only answer I can really think of is — [*Don't do that, then.*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ri3aL8At44I&t=1m25s)
Just like in my `zip` example above: in our C++ programs, we need to maintain a good
intuitive sense for when some unqualified name (like `begin`, or `size`, or `zip`)
is *likely* to get stepped on in a future standard, and *avoid using that name today*,
even if it has not *yet* been stepped on.
This is arguably a very unfortunate state of affairs... but it's the state of affairs
we've got.

*Avoid making ADL calls to functions with common names.*

----

UPDATE, 2019-05-20:
[LLVM/Clang just ran into the same issue with a function named `apply`.](https://github.com/llvm-mirror/clang/commit/61603736e7c9092e0df68d4dd8c87f33eb2e603d)
