---
layout: post
title: "_Contra_ CTAD"
date: 2018-12-09 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  blog-roundup
  class-template-argument-deduction
  compiler-diagnostics
  llvm
  pitfalls
---

Today Andrzej Krzemieński posted a really nice blog post on class template argument deduction (CTAD)
and `std::optional`. The key example from
["Deducing your Intentions"](https://akrzemi1.wordpress.com/2018/12/09/deducing-your-intentions/) (2018-12-09)
goes like this:

    template<class T>
    void f1(T v)
    {
        auto o = std::make_optional(v);
        static_assert(std::is_same_v<decltype(o), std::optional<T>>);
    }

    template<class T>
    void f2(T v)
    {
        auto o = std::optional(v);
        static_assert(std::is_same_v<decltype(o), std::optional<T>>);
    }

The `static_assert` in `f1` will always pass (as long as `T` is deduced; I mean obviously
`f1<int&>` will fail the assertion).

The `static_assert` in `f2` will sometimes pass and sometimes fail.
[For example,](https://godbolt.org/z/sR9FgK)

    std::optional<int> o;
    f1(o);  // OK
    f2(o);  // static_assert fails

Read Andrzej's excellent post for the full details.

----

At CppCon 2018, Stephan T. Lavavej gave a pretty great talk on CTAD:
["Class Template Argument Deduction for Everyone."](https://youtu.be/-H-ut6j1BYU)
Stephan's point of view is essentially "pro-CTAD," but he revels in the subtle details
just as much as I do. (He has to; you can't write a solid library implementation unless
you know all the crazy corner cases users might throw at you.)
So, by the end of his talk, I was even more convinced than before that
<b>CTAD is a feature best avoided in production codebases.</b>

[I asked](https://youtu.be/-H-ut6j1BYU?t=56m29s) whether any vendors
were moving to diagnose any use of CTAD under a command-line flag.
This is a reaction we've seen to previous decades' features which also fell into the bucket
of "_possible_ to use safely, but not _safe_ per se"; I'm thinking specifically of
`-fno-exceptions` and `-Wvla`.

> ARTHUR: I came in here thinking that CTAD was terrible and I never want to use it,
> and you convinced me that I was right.
>
> Are any of the major compilers considering adding a diagnostic
> for unintentional use of CTAD?
>
> STEPHAN: Ah... how can we determine what is unintentional? You said you wanted a `pair`,
> and we constructed a `pair`, and it succeeded! How do we know you didn't actually
> want that?
>
> ARTHUR: Well, because we turned on the warning.
>
> STEPHAN: Oh, turned on a warning. That's—
>
> ARTHUR: We don't want to write [your `pair`-like example] [`mp2`](https://youtu.be/-H-ut6j1BYU?t=20m40s)...
> and I am perfectly willing to throw out the baby with the bathwater.
>
> STEPHAN: So, what if somebody doesn't like uniform initialization, and they want a
> warning, "Wow, you used braces there, I don't think you wanted that"? Or, "wow, you used
> `nullptr`, but we were trying to use the `NULL` macro"?
>
> I mean, a compiler *could* implement a warning. You could probably go implement it in Clang right now.
> But that doesn't _seem_ to be a very useful warning to me, because, what is the danger of using CTAD?
> It could deduce the _wrong_ type? That seems unlikely. I have not encountered cases
> where CTAD, used with the STL, will deduce wrong types. Like, the `MyPair` example here
> might seem scary; but `std::pair` has a deduction guide, because we thought about this.
>
> So, I mean, yeah. The feature may do some unexpected things. But it seems fairly low-risk.
> Certainly much lower risk than the usual sorts of things the compiler emits warnings for.
> But yeah— submit a pull request to Clang, see if you get it accepted.

As I explained to Richard Powell afterward, "I like features that work 100% of the time.
I hate features that work 99% of the time. Working 99% of the time is _much worse_ than
working 50% of the time." And CTAD is the poster child for a feature that works 99% of the
time. That is, it works 100% of the time... _until it doesn't._

As of a few days ago, I have submitted [pull request D54565](https://reviews.llvm.org/D54565)
to Clang. With Andrzej's blog post landing today, it seems like an opportune time to mention
that this pull request does exist, and I would very much like to see it get in!

----

As originally submitted, D54565 merely took the existing diagnostic (part of `-Wc++14-compat`)
and split it out into a sub-diagnostic `-Wc++14-compat-ctad` that could be toggled individually.
I got some feedback from which I inferred it might be more palatable as a plain old `-Wctad`,
similar to the existing `-Wvla` for C99.

Of course, "_more_ palatable" doesn't necessarily mean "palatable." It remains to be seen
whether anyone in the Clang organization shares my worrywarting about CTAD, versus Stephan's
(and, clearly, the C++17 committee's) position of

> What is the danger of using CTAD? [...]
> You said you wanted a `pair`, and we constructed a `pair`, and it succeeded!
> How [does the compiler] know you didn't actually want that?

Yeah, what could possibly go wrong?
