---
layout: post
title: 'Thoughts on Concepts, P0745, and P1079'
date: 2018-05-28 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  concepts
  wg21
---

I just read through Bjarne Stroustrup's paper
[P1079R0 "A minimal solution to the concepts syntax problems"](http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2018/p1079r0.pdf).
This paper is a response to Herb Sutter's
[P0745 "Concepts in-place syntax"](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2018/p0745r1.pdf).
To understand P1079 you have to understand P0745, and to understand P0745 you have to understand what came before
(which is to say, the current state of Concepts).


## Current concepts syntax

In the current working draft, the syntax for defining classically polymorphic
algorithms versus generic algorithms looks like this:

    class BorkableBase {
        virtual int bork() const = 0;
    };

    // classically polymorphic function
    void make_bork(const BorkableBase& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

    template<class T>
    concept Borkable = requires(const T& t) {
        { t.bork() } -> int;
    };

    template<class T>  // unconstrained template
    void make_bork(const T& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

Notice that for the _unconstrained_ template, we have essentially just one syntax to learn.
But for _constrained_ templates, the working draft of C++2a permits at least these three
different syntaxes, each of which has a slightly different SFINAE effect:

    template<class T>  // constrained template, option 1
        requires Borkable<T>
    void make_bork(const T& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

    template<class T>  // constrained template, option 2
    void make_bork(const T& x) requires Borkable<T> {
        x.bork();
    }

    template<Borkable T>  // constrained template, option 3
    void make_bork(const T& x) {
        x.bork();
    }


## Terse syntax

The Concepts TS proposed two _additional_ syntaxes, on top of
these three, which did not (yet) make it into the working paper.
These are the so-called "terse" syntaxes:

    Borkable{T}
    void make_bork(const T& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

    void make_bork(const Borkable& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

Notice that both of these definitions still define _function templates_,
not functions; but neither one uses the keyword `template` anywhere.
Also notice that the second and tersest variation specifically looks
_exactly like_ the original, classically polymorphic, non-template
`make_bork`; the insignificant difference being that we wrote
`const Borkable& x` (indicating a template) instead of `const BorkableBase& x`
(indicating a non-template).

This is why "terse syntax" was left out of the working paper. People _really_
didn't like the idea of functions turning into templates merely because of
the spelling of a user-defined identifier. People (including myself) would
like some hint when looking at code whether we're looking at a template or not.
It doesn't matter so much when you're looking at well-written, bug-free code;
but it seems like it would matter a great deal when you're looking at unfamiliar
code trying to track down a bug.

Compare the situation we had in C++03 with

    class Widget : public Gadget, public Digit {
        std::map<std::string, int> fields_;
    public:
        int get_value(const std::string& name) const {
            return fields.at(name);
        }
    };

Is `get_value` a virtual method, or not? We don't know from its definition;
we have to look at the class definitions of `Gadget` and `Digit` to find out if
either of them have a `virtual int get_value(const std::string&) const` member
function. (And what if one of them has `virtual int get_value(const char *) const`,
or `virtual int get_value(const std::string&)`, or `virtual int getvalue(const std::string&) const`?
Did we just find a typo-bug in `Widget`, or is its behavior intentional?)

That problem got solved by adding unambiguous syntax for "I want to be `virtual`",
namely, `override`. We can get the compiler to diagnose any (accidentally) virtual
method which lacks `override`, and the compiler is required to diagnose any
(accidentally) non-virtual method which is specified as `override`. Adding
special-purpose syntax has rescued us from a source of confusing bugs in unfamiliar
code.


## P0745 in-place syntax

Herb's P0745 proposes a compromise syntax that's still terse-ish, but varies
just enough from the syntax of a classically polymorphic function. He proposes
both of these new syntaxes *instead* of the terse syntaxes from the TS:

    template<Borkable{T}>
    void make_bork(const T& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

    void make_bork(const Borkable{T}& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

The first syntax doesn't make any sense to me, because I cannot understand how the
compiler is supposed to distinguish between _this_ set of template-introducers, all
of which define a template _non-type_ parameter...

    template<int x>           // C++98
    template<int>             // C++98
    template<auto x>          // C++17
    template<auto>            // C++17
    template<auto{T} x>       // P0745
    template<auto{T}>         // P0745
    template<Borkable{T} x>   // P0745
    template<Borkable{T}>     // P0745

...and _this_ set, all of which define a template _type_ parameter.

    template<class>
    template<class T>
    template<Borkable T>      // WP but not P0745
    template<Borkable{T}>     // P0745

So we'll leave the first syntax alone and focus on the second syntax.

    void make_bork(const Borkable{T}& x) {
        x.bork();
    }

This syntax makes a great deal of sense to me, although I stop well short of
saying that I _want_ it in C++2a. (Honestly I don't think I even want
"constrained template, option 3" to remain in C++2a. I would be very happy if there were
a precise 1:1 relationship between _constraints_ in my codebase and _`requires`-clauses_
in my codebase.)


## P1079's objections and observations

Part of the ongoing problem, which P0745 acknowledges but does not really solve,
is that there is *another* kind-of ambiguity in the working paper's third syntax.

    template<XXX> concept Borkable = true;

    template<Borkable B> void foo();

    int main() {
        foo<int>();  // A
        foo<1>();    // B
    }

[When compiled](https://godbolt.org/g/BhsmTq) with `-DXXX=class`, line A compiles and line B doesn't.
When compiled with `-DXXX=auto`, line B compiles and line A doesn't.
So, in order to know what a given template declaration means, we have to know the _kinds of template parameters_
taken by each of its associated concepts. This is not an ambiguity from the compiler's point of view
(since it knows everything), but it is a potential source of confusion for the _human reader_.

(Sidenote: [It _is_ an ambiguity for GCC's current `-fconcepts`](https://godbolt.org/g/7aNHU5),
based on the Concepts TS,
which supports "function-style concepts" which are overloadable just like any other function template.
Fortunately, function-style concepts did not make it into C++2a.)

In [P1079R0 "A minimal solution to the concepts syntax problems"](http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2018/p1079r0.pdf),
Bjarne Stroustrup writes:

> I suspect the real problem is that we would like values of types that match the concepts we otherwise use.
> That is, we might need pairs of concepts, such as `Arithmetic` and `Arithmetic_value`.
>
>     template<typename T> concept Arithmetic = requires { /* ... */ };
>     template<auto N> concept Arithmetic_value = Arithmetic<decltype(N)>;
>
> We can now write:
>
>     template<Arithmetic N, Arithmetic_value n> void f(N); // type concept and value concept
>
> I consider this simple and elegant, and it works today.
> [...]
> Incidentally, this technique mirrors the `_v` and `_t` naming convention for type traits.
> That is, we already use naming conventions to help people where compilers have no problems.

Except for the ugly use of [giraffe case](/blog/2018/03/16/giraffe-case/),
I'm personally willing to accept this argument at this point. It would be even better if we could
agree that concepts apply only to _types_, and there is no use-case for a "value concept," and we
should just remove them from the working paper — but if we can't agree on that, I hope we can
at least agree to suffix all of our value concepts with `Value`.

    // Acceptable IMHO: Suffix value concepts with `Value`.

    template<int I> concept NonnegativeValue = (I >= 0);

    template<class T, NonnegativeValue N>
    class my_array { ... };

    // Preferable IMHO: Don't use value concepts.

    template<class T, int N> requires (N >= 0)
    class my_array { ... };

P1079 also raises an interesting objection to P0745's `Iterator{It}`:

>     template<Number{N}> void f(N); // N is a type name
>
> This is "odd"... We don't usually use clustering syntax for a single element.

Here the phrase "clustering syntax" seems to refer to the curly braces, which indeed are
typically used in C++ to indicate _sequences of things_: array initializers, or constructor
parameters, or the sequence of statements making up a compound statement.

I wonder if this phrase "clustering syntax" indicates growing mainstream acceptance of the idea that curly-brace-initializers
should be used primarily for _sequences_ (such as `vector<int>{1,2,3}`) and avoided when the
constructor parameters are _not a sequence_ (such as [`vector<int>{1,2,Alloc{}}`](https://wandbox.org/permlink/xOYnpiaP0AWkIuiv)).

It is, arguably, "odd" that the 99-percent-most-common case in P0745 syntax is for the `{}` to enclose only
a single element and not a sequence. However, notice that P0745's syntax cleanly allows for
multi-argument concepts without the programmer needing to learn any additional syntax:

    template<SwappableWith{T,U}>
    void swap_with(T& t, U& u) {
        using std::swap;
        swap(t, u);
    }

To rewrite this `swap_with` so that it tersely expresses the *actually appropriate*
constraint — `requires(SwappableWith<T&, U&>)` — is left as an exercise for the reader,
as is to ponder the interaction between concepts and cv-ref-qualification in general.
