---
layout: post
title: 'Use-cases for `false_v`'
date: 2018-04-02 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  proposal
  templates
  undefined-behavior
---

C++17 has `void_t<Ts...>` (an alias template) as a synonym for `void`.
I propose that we ought to have `false_v<Ts...>` (a constexpr variable template)
as a synonym for `false`.


Using `void_t`
--------------

First, a digression about `void_t`. Its use-case is something like this:

    template<class T, class = void>
    struct has_mapped_type : false_type {};

    template<class T>
    struct has_mapped_type<T, void_t<typename T::mapped_type>>
        : true_type {};

    static_assert(has_mapped_type<map<int,int>>::value);
    static_assert(!has_mapped_type<set<int>>::value);

In my own code (which, admittedly, is mostly not "C++17 and later" yet;
I still value portability to C++14 in many contexts), I would be more apt
to write it like this:

    template<class T, class = void>
    struct has_mapped_type : false_type {};

    template<class T>
    struct has_mapped_type<T, decltype(void(declval<typename T::mapped_type>()))>
        : true_type {};

    static_assert(has_mapped_type<map<int,int>>::value);
    static_assert(!has_mapped_type<set<int>>::value);

As described in my CppCon 2017 talk ["A Soupçon of SFINAE,"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ybaE9qlhHvw)
here we're working in three different "spaces" at once. We have _value-space_,
_type-space_, and _SFINAE-space_.

I tend to use `decltype(void(expr))` as my go-to idiom for
turning a value-space expression `expr` into a point in SFINAE-space
(that point being either "`void`" or "ill-formed"). And then if I have a
type-expression such as `T::mapped_type`, I turn _that_ into a point in value-space
via `std::declval<type-expression>()`. So to get from a point in type-space
to a point in SFINAE-space, I'll just apply both tricks together:
`decltype(void(std::declval<typename T::mapped_type>()))` is "`void`" when
the type-space point `typename T::mapped_type` exists, and "ill-formed" otherwise.

In C++17, `void_t` provides a short cut:
`std::void_t<typename T::mapped_type>` is "`void`" when
the type-space point `typename T::mapped_type` exists, and "ill-formed" otherwise.


Using `false_v`
---------------

Despite the intentional similarity in naming, the use-case for `false_v` is
completely different from that of `void_t`.

My definition of `false_v` looks like this:

    template<typename...> inline constexpr bool false_v = false;

Here's our use-case:

    template<class OuterAlloc, class... InnerAllocs>
    class scoped_allocator_adaptor {
    public:
        using outer_allocator_type = OuterAlloc;
        using inner_allocator_type = scoped_allocator_adaptor<InnerAllocs...>;

    private:
        outer_allocator_type m_outer;
        inner_allocator_type m_inner;

        using OuterTraits = allocator_traits<OuterAlloc>;

        // ...
    public:
        template<class... Args>
        void construct(value_type *p, Args&&... args) {
            if constexpr (!uses_allocator_v<value_type, inner_allocator_type>) {
                OuterTraits::construct(m_outer, p, std::forward<Args>(args)...);
            } else if constexpr (is_constructible_v<value_type, allocator_arg_t, inner_allocator_type, Args&&...>) {
                OuterTraits::construct(m_outer, p, allocator_arg, m_inner, std::forward<Args>(args)...);
            } else if constexpr (is_constructible_v<value_type, Args&&..., inner_allocator_type&>) {
                OuterTraits::construct(m_outer, p, std::forward<Args>(args)..., m_inner);
            } else {
                // TODO, this indicates user error
            }
        }
    };

On the line marked `TODO`, we'd like to give the user a helpful message
indicating the precise way in which they screwed up:

    static_assert(false, 
        "value_type is allocator-aware, "
        "but is not constructible with these argument types");

However, if we do that, [we get a hard compiler error.](https://wandbox.org/permlink/XRT8UQ1RuFUEHagg)
I mean, sure we wanted a compiler error in the case that this codepath was *instantiated*, but we
didn't want it to error out even when it was never called at all!

The problem here is [[temp.res]/8](http://eel.is/c++draft/temp.res#8):

> The validity of a template may be checked prior to any instantiation.
> The program is ill-formed, no diagnostic required, if:
>
> - no valid specialization can be generated for a template
>   or a substatement of a constexpr if statement within a template
>   and the template is not instantiated

Obviously "no valid specialization can be generated" for the body of a template
(or `if constexpr`) that contains `static_assert(false)` — every possible specialization
will immediately error out with a diagnostic such as "`static_assert` failed: `false`".

So in other words, the code we wrote above, using `static_assert(false)` to
diagnose user error, is [*literally undefined behavior*](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/22180312/)
as far as the
Standard is concerned! This is horrible, but honestly I'm more annoyed that
it "does the wrong thing" by preemptively emitting an error on today's compilers.

Okay, so how do we get the compiler to stop "doing the wrong thing" and let us
use `static_assert(false)` in this case? Well, we just need to trick the compiler
into thinking that our `false` expression might not *always* be false. So we make our
expression template-dependent!

    static_assert(false_v<Args&&...>,
        "value_type is allocator-aware, "
        "but is not constructible with these argument types");

Now the compiler is not allowed to instantiate `false_v<Args&&...>` until it
knows exactly what `Args&&...` are, which means it needs to see the call site
first. It physically cannot tell whether it is safe to preemptively error out,
and so it is not allowed to.

In fact, with both Clang and GCC, it suffices for us to write

    static_assert(false_v<T>,
        "value_type is allocator-aware, "
        "but is not constructible with these argument types");

The compiler could theoretically bugger up `false_v<T>` here as soon as it
knows what `T` is, but in practice, with today's compilers, this is "dependent enough"
to trick the compiler.

Here's one more example where I use `false_v` to diagnose user error
in a template:

    template<class P, class T>
    auto pointer_to_impl(T& r, priority_tag<1>)
        -> decltype(P::pointer_to(r))
    {
        return P::pointer_to(r);
    }

    template<class P, class T>
    P pointer_to_impl(T&, priority_tag<0>) {
        static_assert(false_v<T>,
            "Pointer-like type P does not provide "
            "a static member function pointer_to(p)");
    }

    template<class Ptr>
    struct pointer_traits {
        // ...

        template<class U>
        static auto pointer_to(U& r) {
            return pointer_to_impl<Ptr>(r, priority_tag<1>{});
        }
    };

See ["`priority_tag` for ad-hoc tag dispatch"](/blog/2021/07/09/priority-tag) (2021-07-09).
