---
layout: post
title: 'In support of P1485 "Better keywords for coroutines"'
date: 2019-06-26 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  coroutines
  proposal
  wg21
---

Antony Polukhin's [P1485 "Better keywords for coroutines"](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2019/p1485r1.html)
is an almost-slam-dunk paper in my opinion. It names a glaringly obvious problem, proposes a clean solution, and incidentally
solves some other minor problems along the way. I suspect it is going to need all the help it can get, just to get _discussed_
before C++2a is released. (And after C++2a is released, of course it will be too late to change anything.)

To take some examples from [Yakk's StackOverflow explanation of C++2a coroutines](https://stackoverflow.com/a/44244451/1424877)...
here's the "before" syntax (current Working Draft syntax):

    generator<int> get_integers(int start, int step) {
        for (int current = start; true; current += step) {
            co_yield current;
        }
    }

And here's the "after" (P1485's proposed syntax):

    generator<int> get_integers(int start, int step) async {
        for (int current = start; true; current += step) {
            yield current;
        }
    }

Yakk points out that

> A function becomes a coroutine by having [a keyword such as `co_await`, `co_yield`, or `co_return`] in its body.
> So [without close inspection of every line of the body] they are indistinguishable from functions.

With Antony's P1485 syntax, this (minor?) problem goes away.
With P1485, coroutines are distinguished from non-coroutines at a fixed place:
to the right of the `)` in their function header. You don't have to spend O(n) time scanning the function body
before deciding [what color function](/blog/2018/03/16/async-roundup/)
you're dealing with. This has benefits for humans, of course; but it might also be a benefit to _compilers_,
who don't like to use O(n)-lookahead algorithms where O(1) will do.

But compilers do tend to have very clever ways of avoiding O(n)-lookahead algorithms. The situation in the
absence of `async` is exactly analogous to the situation with C++14's `auto` return types,
which compilers already handle just fine. (By the way, `auto foo() { co_return 42; }` isn't a valid
function definition, because the compiler can't interpret the meaning of `co_return` without a concrete
return type.) So the O(n) versus O(1) business is really about the human factor.

Here's another "before" from Yakk's article:

    std::future<std::expected<std::string>> load_data(std::string resource_name)
    {
        auto handle = co_await open_resource(resource_name);
        while (auto line = co_await read_line(handle)) {
            if (std::optional<std::string> r = parse_data_from_line(line))
                co_return *r;
        }
        co_return std::unexpected(resource_lacks_data(resource_name));
    }

And here's the P1485 "after":

    std::future<std::expected<std::string>> load_data(std::string resource_name) async
    {
        auto handle = await open_resource(resource_name);
        while (auto line = await read_line(handle)) {
            if (std::optional<std::string> r = parse_data_from_line(line))
                return *r;
        }
        return std::unexpected(resource_lacks_data(resource_name));
    }

This bit of code is a great example of the "human factors" concerned with coroutine programming.
Seeing the "before" code, without `async` in the signature to remind you, you might be forgiven
for recalling your C++ 101 training:

> For user-defined types such as `std::string`, pass-by-const-reference is more efficient than pass-by-value.

So you'd rewrite the code to use `const std::string& resource_name`, and boom! —
[dangling pointer dereference](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2018/p0973r0.pdf)
and undefined behavior!  (Notice that `resource_name` is used again on the last line of the function
body. That's the reference that will be dangling, not the first one.)

Having the keyword `async` in close proximity to the parameter list could be enough of a reminder
that it would prevent dangling-pointer bugs at least _some_ of the time.


## P1485's `async`-on-forward-declaration business is not so hot

P1485 proposes additionally that coroutines _may_ be distinguished _at the declaration site_ from non-coroutines
(but they don't have to be, and there's no penalty for incorrectly marking a non-coroutine as a coroutine
or vice versa). Antony's example is:

    // Is it a coroutine?
    template<class T>
    T function(std::string s);

    // This is a coroutine!
    template<class T>
    T function(std::string s) async;

This strikes me as problematic; we end up with the same situation as with `override`, where we have a way to mark
a signature as _yes_ coroutine (or _yes_ override), but no way to mark it unambiguously _not_ coroutine (or
_not_ override). And unlike `override`, there's no equivalent of "class scope" around this declaration; the compiler
can't detect places you _accidentally_ forgot the `async`, because plenty of people writing
declarations in that same scope — file scope — are _deliberately_ not going to bother writing the `async`.

Philosophically, whether a future-returning function is implemented as a coroutine (using `co_return` and friends)
or a non-coroutine (using `return std::make_ready_future<T>(...)` and friends) is an implementation detail; it
doesn't need to be committed to in the public API (at the declaration site),
merely in the implementation (at the definition site).

So at best we're marking the above `function` declaration as "Never mind if I'm a coroutine;
still, I promise that I'll return something awaitable." But C++2a has _much better_ ways to mark that!

    // Is it a coroutine? Probably not.
    template<class T>
    T function(std::string s);

    // This is quite definitely a "coroutine", as far as the caller cares!
    template<class Future> requires std::Awaitable<Future>
    Future async_function(std::string s);


## The release of C++2a should be delayed past 2020

Not just because one of the flagship features (Coroutines) is still undergoing major revisions;
but also because the other flagship features (Concepts, `operator<=>`) are undergoing major revisions;
other major features (Modules and `constexpr new`) are completely unimplemented; nobody can even agree on
what one major feature (Contracts) means...

[Setting realistic deadlines is maybe an art, maybe a science](https://hackernoon.com/deadlines-that-are-doomed-from-the-beginning-21fd6960cd7e),
but regardless, the timetable must match the amount of work
to be done. C++2a has a _very_ big amount of work to be done, and work items of the form
"implement and get user feedback on _____" aren't necessarily parallelizable.

When is the best time to catch bugs: while the product is in development, or after it has been released to customers?
