---
layout: post
title: '_Contra_ P0339 "`polymorphic_allocator<>` as a vocabulary type"'
date: 2019-07-02 00:02:00 +0000
tags:
  allocators
  class-template-argument-deduction
  library-design
  proposal
  rant
  wg21
---

Pablo Halpern's [P0339R6 "`polymorphic_allocator<>` as a vocabulary type"](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2019/p0339r6.pdf)
(February 2019) was undergoing LWG wording review in Kona this February. It's still on track to make C++2a.
It should be stopped.

(For WG21 members, the notes from LWG wording review are [here](http://wiki.edg.com/bin/view/Wg21kona2019/LWG0339Notes).)

> In this paper, we propose an explicit specialization of `pmr::polymrophic_allocator` for use as a vocabulary type.
> This type meets the requirements of an allocator in the standard but is easier to use in contexts where
> it is not necessary or desirable to fix the allocator type at compile time.

First of all, this use of the phrase "vocabulary type" doesn't jibe with my understanding of the term's meaning.
A "vocabulary type" is supposed to be a type that is a _lingua franca_ between different library interfaces (e.g. `double`,
`std::string`). P0339's proposed `std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<std::byte>` is a convenience
type for the writers of _implementation details_; it isn't expected to appear in interfaces at all.

[EDIT: Second of all, P0339R6 *no longer proposes an explicit specialization of anything!*
It proposes that the convenience API go into the primary template, as per my "idea number one" below.
I have edited out one section below that was merely objecting to the explicit specialization.]

Historically, P0339 is a "compromise paper" that grew out of
[P0148 "`memory_resource_ptr`: A Limited Smart Pointer for `memory_resource` Correctness"](http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2015/p0148r0.pdf)
(October 2015). To be fair, that paper wasn't a good idea either; but I do think that "compromise papers" tend
(1) to be written prematurely and (2) to be of inferior quality. When you introduce a secondary goal of
"get votes from faction X in XWG," the primary goal of "make a good and usable product" tends to be watered down.
(And I say this as the author of a successful compromise paper myself!
I still write code about once a year where
[N4537](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4537.html) `shared_ptr::unlock()`
would be useful, and I still have never used
[P0163](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0163r0.html) `shared_ptr::weak_type`.)


## P0339's example code

Okay, so, what does P0339 propose to allow us to write? From the paper:
[Here](https://godbolt.org/z/p-HxY7) is the "before" code, and [here](https://godbolt.org/z/_blQ6u) is the "after" code.
P0339 shows a dramatic difference between the "before" version of allocating a linked-list node:

    using node_alloc = typename alloc_traits::template rebind_alloc<node>;
    node_alloc  m_alloc;

    using alloc_node_traits =
        typename alloc_traits::template rebind_traits<node>;
    node *n = alloc_node_traits::allocate(m_alloc, 1);
    alloc_node_traits::construct(m_alloc, &n->m_value, v);
    n->m_next = m_head;

and the "after" version:

    using allocator_type = std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<>;
    allocator_type m_alloc;

    node *n = m_alloc.allocate_object<node>();
    m_alloc.construct(&n->m_value, v);
    n->m_next = m_head;

However, notice that the "before" version was an STL-style class template taking an allocator parameter,
whereas the "after" version is a concrete class type restricted to dealing only with a single allocator type —
`std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator`.

So the _main_ difference between P0339's `StringList1` and `StringList2` is that `StringList2` removes the allocator template parameter.
Removing template parameters does indeed dramatically simplify code, but you don't need to modify `polymorphic_allocator` to get
that benefit!  Let's compare how the non-parameterized `StringList2` would look in pure vanilla C++17: [here](https://godbolt.org/z/Qu_0qV).

    using node_alloc = std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<node>;
    node_alloc m_alloc;

    node *n = m_alloc.allocate(1);
    m_alloc.construct(&n->m_value, v);
    n->m_next = m_head;

That's right — the vanilla C++17 version of `StringList2` is actually *simpler* than P0339's proposed C++2a version!

> Notice that because `StringList2` is not aware of allocator types other than its hard-coded one,
> we don't have to go through `allocator_traits` to get at `construct`. We know that `polymorphic_allocator<node>`
> provides `allocate` and `construct` methods that fit our needs here exactly.


## The `new_object<T>` API

For some reason, P0339's code example chooses not to address the C++ allocator model's biggest pain point
for casual STL users — the separation of `allocate` from `construct`. This separation is necessary if you're implementing `std::vector`,
but it's not necessary for something like `StringList2`.

> Well, P0339's example can't use `new_object` because `struct node` is not allocator-aware.
> `node` deliberately lacks the constructors that would be needed to pipe the allocator from `m_alloc`
> down into `node::m_value`. That's why P0339's example code explicitly calls `construct` on the
> `n->m_value` object, instead of just letting it be constructed by `node::node` or by `new_object`.

So it would be cool if we could write simply

    node *n = m_alloc.new_object(m_head, v);

And in fact P0339 proposes almost exactly this interface!

However — and this is where it gets icky — P0339 proposes to add this new interface _only_ to `polymorphic_allocator<std::byte>`,
not to any arbitrary `polymorphic_allocator`. [EDIT: Well, not anymore; but the examples and the overall design haven't caught up yet.]
What this means is that if you want to use `polymorphic_allocator<node>` in some
parts of your code and the-new-interface in other parts, you'll still have to do a type conversion. Furthermore, because
`polymorphic_allocator<std::byte>` doesn't know anything about `struct node`, you'll have to tell it about `node`, via a
template argument to the `new_object` function template. That is, rather than writing simply what I wrote above, P0339 actually
proposes that you should write

    node *n = m_alloc.new_object<node>(m_head, v);

This looks worse again!

Now, there can be an advantage to specifying the object type at `new_object`'s call-site instead of in the type of `m_alloc`.
The advantage would be if you are going to be allocating many different types of objects. Rather than constantly rebinding
`m_alloc`, as in

    A *pa = std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<A>(m_alloc).new_object(args);
    B *pb = std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<B>(m_alloc).new_object(args);

you could write simply

    A *pa = m_alloc.new_object<A>(args);
    B *pb = m_alloc.new_object<B>(args);

Perhaps the "best of both worlds" interface, just in terms of concise code (although certainly not in terms of
teachability, implementation surface area, or user confusion) would be to provide both, via a single member
function template with a defaulted template parameter `U`:

    template<class T>
    class polymorphic_allocator {
        template<class U = T, class... Args>
        U *new_object(Args&&...);
    };

This would add concrete and idiosyncratic functionality to `polymorphic_allocator<T>`. Now, I'm not a fan of
idiosyncratic functionality. For example, `std::allocator<T>` would not get `new_object`
automatically. Programmers would have to choose between proper C++11 allocator-awareness and
getting to use the shiny toy that is `new_object`.

(The usual way you add new functionality to a bunch of classes at once is to use a
[traits class](/blog/2018/07/14/traits-classes/) — we could add `allocator_traits<A>::new_object(Args&&...)`
in C++2a — but that wouldn't help with P0339's use-case, which is where they don't _want_ to be parameterized
on an allocator type and they don't _want_ the verbosity of `allocator_traits`.)

However, there is nothing intrinsically wrong with idiosyncratic functionality. `polymorphic_allocator`
is also the only kind of allocator that supports a `.resource()` member function. Making it the only
kind of allocator that supports `.new_object()` wouldn't be _terribly_ different, in principle.


## The interaction with CTAD and common typos

Most confusingly, P0339 proposes to give the existing `polymorphic_allocator` a _defaulted template parameter_.
Before P0339, the following code snippet would be a syntax error. (You forgot the `<T>`!)

    template<class T>
    void *allocate_space_for_n_Ts_with_the_default_resource(int n) {
        std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator alloc;
        return alloc.allocate(n);
    }

After P0339, thanks to the defaulted template parameter, and partly [thanks to CTAD](/blog/2018/12/09/wctad/),
that code snippet would compile quietly and allocate `n` *bytes* of memory, rather than the intended `n*sizeof(T)` bytes.

Notice that even in a world without CTAD, accidentally writing `polymorphic_allocator<>` instead of `polymorphic_allocator<T>`
is not unthinkable. A significant number of C++ developers [are already confused](https://www.reddit.com/r/cpp/comments/c3mup9/c_precologne_mailing/erxyf5e/)
about which of `polymorphic_allocator` and `memory_resource` are templates, which are type-erased, and which are classically
polymorphic. (Hint: [`polymorphic_allocator` is not the polymorphic one!](https://godbolt.org/z/rK7IIW))
Allowing these developers to write `std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator a;` as if it were a concrete
class type does them a grave disservice.


## In short:

- P0339's proposed convenience functionality is not as optimally designed as it could be.

- P0339's own example shows the _inferiority_ of P0339's `allocate_object<T>` functionality, compared to what's already in C++17.

- P0339's library design pointlessly privileges `std::byte` over all other `T`.

- P0339 proposes to add a default template parameter that interacts badly with CTAD, and serves merely to hide bugs.


## What might a convenience interface look like?

I would suggest three ways that the C++17 API could be extended to be more user-friendly. But I haven't thought too deeply
about these. You can see from the code snippets above that C++17's API is already pretty ergonomic, as soon as you abandon
the idea of supporting different allocator types; so we're arguing over very tiny improvements here. I don't propose any
of these ideas for standardization.

Idea number one: Add `new_object(Args&&...)` to _all_ specializations of `polymorphic_allocator`, not just to one specialization.
[EDIT: P0339R6's formal wording had already adopted this idea, even though the English text hadn't caught up.]

    template<class T>
    class polymorphic_allocator {

        template<class U = T, class... Args>
        U *new_object(Args&&... args) const {
            auto a = polymorphic_allocator<U>(*this);
            U *p = a.allocate(1);
            try {
                return a.construct(p, std::forward<Args>(args)...);
            } catch (...) { a.deallocate(p, 1); throw; }
        }

    };

----

Idea number two: Introduce a non-templated `memory_resource_handle` which can be used by anyone who wants the convenience
functionality, without messing with `polymorphic_allocator` and the allocator model at all. Using the "handle" model
instead of the "allocator" model, we could write a `StringList3` that looks [like this](https://godbolt.org/z/LjMW4P):

    node *n = m_res.allocate<node>(1);
    m_res.construct(&n->m_value, v);
    n->m_next = m_head;

Here, `m_res` is a data member of type `memory_resource_handle`. It doesn't pretend to be an Allocator, because it doesn't need to.
All accesses to its underlying resource go through the new convenience API, never through the old C++11 allocator API.

Notice that idea number two can be implemented entirely in user code. If you want to use this idiom today in C++17,
go right ahead! You don't need to change the library for this one.

----

Idea number three: If we weren't trying to throw up a firewall in between `memory_resource` and the allocator model, we could
just add the convenience API directly to `memory_resource` itself! For example:

    class memory_resource {
        // The base class of every memory resource.
    private:
        // The vtable members remain unchanged versus C++17.
        virtual void* do_allocate(size_t bytes, size_t alignment) = 0;
        virtual void do_deallocate(void *p, size_t bytes, size_t alignment) = 0;
        virtual bool do_is_equal(const memory_resource& other) const noexcept = 0;
    public:
        // The public API is given extra non-virtual member functions,
        // such as:

        template<class U>
        polymorphic_allocator<U> get_allocator() noexcept {
            return polymorphic_allocator<U>(this);
        }

        template<class U, class... Args>
        U *new_object(Args&&... args) {
            auto a = get_allocator<U>();
            U *p = a.allocate(1);
            try {
                return a.construct(p, std::forward<Args>(args)...);
            } catch (...) { a.deallocate(p, 1); throw; }
        }
    };

Using this `memory_resource`-centric model, a hypothetical `StringList4` wouldn't bother with allocators
at all. It would store `memory_resource *m_mr` internally, and do:

    node *n = m_mr->allocate<node>(1);
    m_mr->construct(&n->m_value, v);
    n->m_next = m_head;

You can simulate this idea in terms of idea number two. All you have to do is implement `memory_resource_handle`, and then
you can deal in terms of `memory_resource *` internally but wrap the pointer in-line whenever it's time to use the new API:

    node *n = memory_resource_handle(m_mr).allocate<node>(1);
    memory_resource_handle(m_mr).construct(&n->m_value, v);
    n->m_next = m_head;

Anyway, I think any of these three ideas would be _far_ better than P0339 (because they do not suffer from any
of the disadvantages in my bulleted list above).  But I don't want to see them in C++2a.  I just don't want to see
P0339 get into C++2a and mess up the situation _worse_ than it was in C++17.

> If it ain't broke, don't fix it!
