---
layout: post
title: 'Classically polymorphic `visit` replaces some uses of `dynamic_cast`'
date: 2020-09-29 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  classical-polymorphism
  metaprogramming
  templates
  variadic-templates
  war-stories
---

I've informally described this C++ utility to several people by now; it's
time I just wrote it up in a blog post.
This utility lets you "visit" a polymorphic base object as if it were a variant,
by specifying the domain of possible child types at the point of the call to `visit`.
`my::visit<X,Y,Z>(b, f)` returns `f(static_cast<X&>(b))` if the dynamic type of `b`
is exactly `X`; `f(static_cast<Y&>(b))` if the dynamic type of `b` is exactly `Y`; and so on.
It perfectly forwards the argument when making the call to `f`.

In other words, it does the same thing as `std::visit`, but instead of operating
on a `std::variant<X,Y,Z>`, it operates on a `Base&` which the programmer promises
will refer to an `X`, `Y`, or `Z` at runtime.

A three-argument overload permits the programmer to specify a custom behavior `e(b)`
when the dynamic type of `b` _isn't_ exactly `X`, `Y`, or `Z`.
The two-argument overload simply throws `std::bad_cast` in that case,
exactly as if we'd failed a `dynamic_cast`.


## Sample use-case

    class Connection { ~~~ };
    class TCPConnection final : public Connection { ~~~ };
    class UDPConnection final : public Connection { ~~~ };

    void handle(TCPConnection&);
    void handle(UDPConnection&);

    void frotz(Connection& conn) {
        if (auto *tcp = dynamic_cast<TCPConnection *>(&conn)) {
            handle(*tcp);
        } else if (auto *udp = dynamic_cast<UDPConnection *>(&conn)) {
            handle(*udp);
        } else {
            throw std::runtime_error("we don't expect this");
        }
    }

Given the above class hierarchy, we could rewrite `frotz` as follows:

    void frotz(Connection& conn) {
        my::visit<TCPConnection, UDPConnection>(conn, [](auto& conn) {
            handle(conn);
        });
    }

Inside the body of the lambda, `conn` has the correct static type: the body
of the lambda will be instantiated for both `TCPConnection&` and `UDPConnection&`.
This is the "magic" that lets it call the correct overload of `handle` in each case.

Here's another example, using the same class hierarchy, demonstrating
the three-argument overload:

    bool isTCPorUDP(const Connection& conn) {
        return (dynamic_cast<const TCPConnection *>(&conn) != nullptr)
            || (dynamic_cast<const UDPConnection *>(&conn) != nullptr);
    }

Rewriting gives us more lines of code, but two fewer `dynamic_cast`s:

    bool isTCPorUDP(const Connection& conn) {
        return my::visit<TCPConnection, UDPConnection>(
            conn,
            [](auto&&) { return true; },  // when TCP or UDP
            [](auto&&) { return false; }  // when something else
        );
    }

If you saw my talk ["`dynamic_cast` From Scratch"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QzJL-8WbpuU) (CppCon 2017),
you may observe that the question "Can `conn` be dynamic-cast to `TCPConnection`?"
is not synonymous with the question "Is the dynamic type of `conn` exactly `TCPConnection`?"
True! But a lot of real-world code has shallow hierarchies (no grandchild classes),
and often when you see "`dynamic_cast`" in real-world code, what it really means
is "compare `typeid`s" — the programmer was just too lazy to spell it out.
For this kind of codebase, switching those wasteful `dynamic_cast`s to `visit` can
be a performance win!

I must also point out that according to the classically polymorphic ideal,
both `handle()` and `isTCPorUDP()` should simply be virtual member functions
of `Connection`; using `dynamic_cast` to sniff at the dynamic type of `conn`
is obviously an antipattern. But, again, a lot of real-world code ends up doing
it anyway. So we might as well let them do it conveniently and efficiently.

> The usual programming caveat applies: If it hurts when you do this, don't do this.


## Implementation

I'll present the implementation backwards, starting with the two-argument overload
that throws `bad_cast` on failure. Notice that throughout I'm using the namespace `my::`
where presumably you'd be using something else.

    template<class... DerivedClasses, class Base, class F>
    auto visit(Base&& b, const F& f)
    {
        return my::visit<DerivedClasses...>(
            static_cast<Base&&>(b), f, [](Base&&) {
                throw std::bad_cast();
            }
        );
    }

Okay, now for the three-argument entry point. It has two callbacks: not just the generic
lambda `f`, but also an "error" callback `e`. It just packages up the deduced
parameters `Base,F,E` and passes them off to a `struct visit_impl` with a static
`call` method:

    template<class... DerivedClasses, class Base, class F, class E>
    auto visit(Base&& b, const F& f, const E& e)
    {
        static_assert(!std::is_pointer_v<std::remove_reference_t<Base>>,
            "Argument must be (reference-to) class type, not pointer type");
        static_assert(std::is_polymorphic_v<std::remove_reference_t<Base>>,
            "Argument must be of polymorphic class type");
        static_assert((std::is_polymorphic_v<DerivedClasses> && ...),
            "Template arguments must all be polymorphic class types");

        return my::visit_impl<Base, F, E>::template call<DerivedClasses...>(
            static_cast<Base&&>(b), f, e
        );
    }

Inside `visit_impl::call`, we'll do the usual "recursive template" trick,
where `call<X,Y,Z>` calls `call<Y,Z>` calls `call<Z>` calls `call<>`.
We must add a few wrinkles at the `call<Z>` level to deal
with the fact that different `e(b)` callbacks might either return a value
(as in our `isTCPorUDP` example above) or exit without returning
(as in the convenience `visit` above, where `e` throws `bad_cast` but claims to return void).
Standard C++ doesn't have any way to mark a function as "not returning."
(There's `[[noreturn]]`, but that's just an optimization hint that doesn't
interact with the type system.
See ["The Ignorable Attributes Rule"](/blog/2018/05/15/the-ignorable-attributes-rule/) (2018-05-15).)
So instead, we'll just assume that if `e(b)` claims to return void and `f((Z&)b)` doesn't,
then `e(b)` must really not return at all.

By the way, notice that in order for `decltype(my::visit<X,Y,Z>(b, f, e))` to make sense,
the same type `T` must be returned from `f((X&)b)`, `f((Y&)b)`, and `f((Z&)b)`.
Unless it throws, `e(b)` also must return that same type `T`.

The final oddity is that although we want `visit_impl<B,F,E>::call<X,Y,Z>(b,f,e)`
to do basically the same thing as `visit_impl<B,F,E>::call<X>(b,f,e)` plus a recursive
case, we need `visit_impl<B,F,E>::call<>(b,f,e)` to do something completely different
— namely, call `e(b)` unconditionally. To create a function template that is callable
as `call<>(b,f,e)` but doesn't ambiguate either of our other `call` signatures,
we make `call<>` a template with a _non-type_ parameter pack. I could have used
`<int=0>` instead of `<int...>`, but I like the mangled names better this way.

    template<class Base, class F, class E>
    struct visit_impl {

        template<int...>  // this is call<>(b, f, e)
        static auto call(Base&& b, const F&, const E& e) {
            return e(static_cast<Base&&>(b));
        }

        template<class DerivedClass, class... Rest>
        static auto call(Base&& b, const F& f, const E& e) {
            using Derived = my::match_cvref_t<Base, DerivedClass>;
            using T = decltype(f(static_cast<Derived&&>(b)));
            using ErrorT = decltype(e(static_cast<Base&&>(b)));
            if (typeid(b) == typeid(DerivedClass)) {
                return f(static_cast<Derived&&>(b));
            } else if constexpr (sizeof...(Rest) != 0) {
                return call<Rest...>(static_cast<Base&&>(b), f, e);
            } else if constexpr (std::is_void_v<ErrorT> && !std::is_void_v<T>) {
                // If e(b) has type void, assume it exits by throwing.
                e(static_cast<Base&&>(b));
                throw std::bad_cast();  // we expect this to be unreachable
            } else {
                return e(static_cast<Base&&>(b));
            }
        }
    };

Notice the ladder of `if`/`else if constexpr`/`else if constexpr`/`else`.
I'd originally written it with more nested scopes for `else` blocks, but
then I realized that I could do it this way and save some tabstops.

The utility `my::match_cvref_t<T, U>` simply takes the cvref-qualifiers
from `T` and applies them to the object type `U`; for example,
`match_cvref_t<const int&, double>` is `const double&`.
The implementation is just a bunch of partial specializations;
I won't bore you with it here.

You can see the complete code for `my::visit`, in the proper order,
on Godbolt [here](https://godbolt.org/z/K3nK1o).
