---
layout: post
title: "How to erase from an STL container"
date: 2020-07-08 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  c++-learner-track
  library-design
  rant
  standard-library-trivia
  stl-classic
excerpt: |
  C++20 introduces new library functions `std::erase` and `std::erase_if`.
  Notice that I said "functions," not "algorithms": these are not implemented as
  generic function templates, but rather as a closed set of function overloads,
  scattered across the STL's many container-related headers.

  Why are these new C++20 functions implemented as a massive overload set,
  instead of as a single "generic programming"–style function template?
---

C++20 introduces new library functions `std::erase` and `std::erase_if`.
Notice that I said "functions," not "algorithms": these are not implemented as
generic function templates, but rather as a closed set of function overloads,
scattered across the STL's many container-related headers.

There's a `std::erase` for [`deque`](http://eel.is/c++draft/deque.erasure),
and one for [`forward_list`](http://eel.is/c++draft/forward.list.erasure),
and one for [`list`](http://eel.is/c++draft/list.erasure), and one for
[`vector`](http://eel.is/c++draft/vector.erasure).

There's a `std::erase_if` for all of the above, and also
for [`map`](http://eel.is/c++draft/map.erasure) and
[`multimap`](http://eel.is/c++draft/multimap.erasure),
and for [`set`](http://eel.is/c++draft/set.erasure) and
[`multiset`](http://eel.is/c++draft/multiset.erasure),
and for [`unordered_map`](http://eel.is/c++draft/unord.map.erasure)
and [`unordered_multimap`](http://eel.is/c++draft/unord.multimap.erasure),
and for [`unordered_set`](http://eel.is/c++draft/unord.set.erasure)
and [`unordered_multiset`](http://eel.is/c++draft/unord.multiset.erasure).

Why are these new C++20 functions implemented as a massive overload set,
instead of as a single "generic programming"–style function template?

Well, generic programming works only when the underlying algorithm is the
same for all possible input types. That is, it relies on the programmer to
create _consistent public APIs_ for all their data types; once you have
consistent APIs, it's easy to write generic algorithms in terms of those
APIs. The STL container types' APIs are _for the most part_ remarkably consistent,
which is why the STL is able to use _so much_ generic programming;
but `erase` and `erase_if` are pushing into new territory
where the types' APIs become noticeably inconsistent.
To erase several items from a vector, you have to do something
fundamentally different from erasing several items from a list or a set.

## Erase all instances of `1` from a `list<int>`

Erasing a single node from a linked list is an O(1) operation that doesn't involve
moving any data around; we simply repoint some prev/next pointers. Naturally,
we have to have _access_ to the prev/next pointers in order to do this operation,
so this operation must be a member function of the `list` container.

The "classic STL" member function `std::list::erase(const_iterator pos)`
encapsulates this pointer-twiddling operation: you give it an iterator to the
element you want to remove, and it deallocates that node and repoints the prev/next
pointers around it.

Of course, once that node has been deallocated, your original iterator `pos` will
point into deallocated memory; so `std::list::erase` helpfully returns you an
iterator to the "next" element of the list so that you can pick it up and keep iterating.
Here's the "classic STL" erase-all-1s-in-the-container loop:

    std::list<int> container = {3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9};
    for (auto it = container.begin(); it != container.end(); ) {
        if (*it == 1) {
            it = container.erase(it);
        } else {
            ++it;
        }
    }

You may encounter minor variations on this theme, such as code that does `container.erase(it++)`
instead of `it = container.erase(it)`, but I strongly recommend sticking to this exact formulation.
As a bonus, this exact formulation will work for _all_ kinds of STL containers —
`list`, `set`, `map`, `vector`, `deque`... The only container for which it won't compile is `forward_list`.

### Removing manually from a `forward_list`

`std::forward_list` puts a wacky twist on much of the classic STL API, because it lacks prev pointers.
The equivalent loop for `forward_list` would look like this:

    std::forward_list<int> container = {3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9};
    for (auto it = container.before_begin(); it != container.end(); ) {
        auto jt = std::next(it);
        if (jt != container.end() && *jt == 1) {
            container.erase_after(it);
        } else {
            it = jt;
        }
    }

But don't write this awful loop if you can help it, because...

### `[forward_]list::remove` exists

If you know you've got some kind of linked list, but aren't sure if it's doubly or singly linked,
then the STL provides another verb for you. The [`remove`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/list/remove)
member function — not to be confused with the `remove` _algorithm!_ — erases all instances of a value from the list.
There's also a `remove_if` member function.

    container.remove(1);

    auto isOdd = [](int x) { return x % 2; };
    container.remove_if(isOdd);

This is an example of what I meant above about how if your _types_ provide a consistent API, then your
_client code_ can use generic programming. Because both `std::list` and `std::forward_list` provide the
same `remove` API, I can write a single function template that operates correctly on either type.
But that function template would fail to compile if I passed it, say, a `std::vector`, because `vector`
doesn't support the `remove` API.

## Erase all instances of `1` from a `vector<int>`

Consider our first snippet again, but now using `vector`.

    std::vector<int> container = {3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9};
    for (auto it = container.begin(); it != container.end(); ) {
        if (*it == 1) {
            it = container.erase(it);
        } else {
            ++it;
        }
    }

This code will compile successfully and run correctly! However, for `vector`, erasing a single element out
of the middle of the vector is not an O(1) pointer-twiddling operation; it's an O(n) operation because we
have to shift the whole "tail" of the vector down by one element to keep everything contiguous.

Repeat that O(n) operation for each of the up-to-n `1`s in the container, and we've got a quadratic algorithm.
That's no good! So for `vector` specifically (and also for `deque`), we want to combine the removal and
the shifting-down of our elements in a single-pass algorithm. "Remove and shift down" is the purpose of
the `std::remove` algorithm, and so we invent the "erase-remove idiom," which also comes in a `remove_if`
flavor:

    std::vector<int> container = {3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9};
    auto it = std::remove(container.begin(), container.end(), 1);
    container.erase(it, container.end());

    auto isOdd = [](int x) { return x % 2; };
    container.erase(
        std::remove_if(container.begin(), container.end(), isOdd),
        container.end()
    );

This is the idiomatic way to erase from a `vector` or `deque`, because it's O(n) instead of
O(n<sup>2</sup>).

The erase-remove idiom also works for `list` and `forward_list`... but for those containers it's likely not as
efficient as our "`erase`-in-a-loop" algorithm, or as just calling `container.remove`. Because it is written
generically in terms of iterators, and involves the container itself only at the end of the whole process,
the erase-remove idiom cannot take advantage of pointer-twiddling tricks; it must do actual move-constructions
of container elements.

The erase-remove idiom (specifically, the `std::remove` part) relies on being able to overwrite the elements
of the container. If your container elements are immutable, then you can't use the erase-remove idiom.
This might happen if you have a container of `lock_guard`s; but more realistically, it'll happen if your
container is a `std::set` or `std::map`. The elements in a `set` are immutable, because a `set` is a
[binary search tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_tree); if you were able to overwrite
the value of some specific element (say, the leftmost element in the tree),
then you could overwrite it with a key that "belonged" elsewhere (say, all the way to the right of the tree),
breaking the tree invariant.

### Unstable removal and the erase-partition idiom

If we must preserve our sequence's order
(say, if we're keeping it sorted by some interesting property), then we should use the erase-remove idiom.
But if the sequence is just a bag of values whose order we don't care about at all,
then we might consider moving single elements from the end of the sequence
to fill each new gap as it's created:

    std::vector<int> container = {3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9};
    for (auto it = container.begin(); it != container.end(); ) {
        if (*it == 1) {
            *it = std::move(container.back());
            container.pop_back();
        } else {
            ++it;
        }
    }

Replace move-assignment with swap, and squash all of the container-resizing operations to the end
of the operation, and you get this classic-looking snippet:

    auto isOne = [](int x) { return x == 1; };
    container.erase(
        std::partition(container.begin(), container.end(), std::not_fn(isOne)),
        container.end()
    );

This idiom, which we might call the "erase-partition idiom," is rare in my experience
but [may be useful](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13818369/is-stability-of-stdremove-and-stdremove-if-design-fail)
in some situations.
See also [P0041 "Unstable remove algorithms"](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0041r0.html)
(September 2015).

Just like the erase-remove idiom, the erase-partition idiom works great for `vector` and `deque`,
works inefficiently for `list` and `forward_list`, and fails to compile for associative containers
such as `set` whose elements are not mutable.

## Erase all "instances" of `1` from a `std::set` or `std::multiset`

Consider our first snippet again, but now using `multiset`.

    std::multiset<int> container = {3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9};
    for (auto it = container.begin(); it != container.end(); ) {
        if (*it == 1) {
            it = container.erase(it);
        } else {
            ++it;
        }
    }

This code will compile successfully and run correctly! However, for `set<int>`, you might realize that this
loop is doing much more work than it needs to. Erasing an element from a binary search tree shouldn't be
an O(n) pointer-twiddling operation; it should be an _O(lg n)_ pointer-twiddling operation! All we need to
do is locate the element(s) to remove within the tree, and then erase them:

    // Beware!
    auto [first, last] = container.equal_range(1);
    container.erase(first, last);

In fact, the associative and unordered containers provide an even shorter shorthand for this operation:

    // Beware!
    container.erase(1);

<b>But!</b> When we do this kind of O(lg n) search operation on a binary search tree, by definition
we are using _the tree's comparator_, which may not match the "ordinary" behavior of our element type.
Suppose our set stored books shelved by author's surname:

    struct ByAuthor {
        bool operator()(const Book& a, const Book& b) const {
            return a.author() < b.author();
        }
    };

    std::multiset<Book, ByAuthor> container = {
        Book("Moby-Dick", "Melville"),
        Book("Hawaii", "Michener"),
        Book("Chesapeake", "Michener"),
        Book("Paradise Lost", "Milton"),
    };

    auto target = Book("Hawaii", "Michener");
    container.erase(target);  // Beware!

When we tell the container to erase _Hawaii_, what the container understands us to mean is "Erase every
element which is equivalent to _Hawaii_ under my comparator." That is, the code above will remove from
`container` every book `b` for which `container.key_comp()(target, b) == false
&& container.key_comp()(b, target) == false` — i.e., every book with author `"Michener"`, including both
_Hawaii_ and _Chesapeake_. Sometimes this is exactly what we want. But it is a significantly different
operation from `std::list::remove` or `std::forward_list::remove`, and so it makes sense that it gets
a significantly different name (`erase` rather than `remove`).

When we use the `erase` member function of an associative or unordered container, we are telling the
container to use its own notion of "equivalence" to avoid searching whole swaths of the container
for matches. This, incidentally, explains why there is a `set::erase(Key)` member function but no
`set::erase_if(Predicate)`: The latter has no relation to the container's own comparator,
and therefore the container itself has nothing to contribute. It's the same reason there's a
`list::remove(Key)` but no `vector::remove(Key)`.

## Which brings us to `std::erase` and `std::erase_if`

Suppose your generic code has access to
[a container your aunt gave you which you don't know what it is](https://www.filfre.net/2013/11/hitchhiking-the-galaxy-infocom-style/),
and you just want to remove all the copies of _Hawaii_ from it (but without removing also
the copies of _Chesapeake_ if it turns out to be a `multiset<Book, ByAuthor>`). Prior to C++20,
the way to do this would be something like

    template<class Container>
    void aloha_oe(Container& container)
    {
        static_assert(std::is_same_v<typename container::value_type, Book>);
        auto hawaii = Book("Hawaii", "Michener");

        if constexpr (is_list_or_forward_list<Container>) {
            container.remove(hawaii);
        } else if constexpr (is_vector_or_deque<Container>) {
            container.erase(std::remove(container.begin(), container.end(), hawaii), container.end());
        } else if constexpr (is_associative_with_default_comparator<Container>) {
            container.erase(hawaii);
        } else if constexpr (is_associative<Container>) {
            for (auto it = container.begin(); it != container.end(); ) {
                if (*it == 1) {
                    it = container.erase(it);
                } else {
                    ++it;
                }
            }
        } else {
            static_assert(!sizeof(Container), "I don't know how to erase from this container");
        }
    }

In C++20, the overload set of `std::erase` and `std::erase_if` permits us to stop open-coding
the `it = container.erase(it)` idiom and to collapse some of those branches together.

    template<class Container>
    void aloha_oe(Container& container)
    {
        static_assert(std::same_as<typename container::value_type, Book>);
        auto hawaii = Book("Hawaii", "Michener");

        if constexpr (is_associative_with_default_comparator<Container>) {
            container.erase(hawaii);
        } else if constexpr (is_sequence_or_associative<Container>) {
            auto is_hawaii = [&](const Book& b) { return b == hawaii; };
            std::erase_if(container, is_hawaii);
        } else {
            static_assert(!sizeof(Container), "I don't know how to erase from this container");
        }
    }

Notice that it's still faster to use `container.erase(hawaii)` — with its O(lg n) tree lookup —
if you happen to know that the container's comparator imposes exactly the same equivalence classes
as the ordinary meaning of `==` does.

Notice also that for the associative containers such as `std::set`, there is no free function
`std::erase(set, hawaii)`. The rationale for that decision in C++20 was that it would be
utterly confusing if `set.erase(hawaii)` did one thing (erase all Michener books)
and `erase(set, hawaii)` did something else (erase _Hawaii_ specifically). Of course, for
the sequence containers, `std::erase` and `std::erase_if` end up having exactly the same
performance characteristics, and so there is no reason for `std::erase` to exist for the
sequence containers either. I tentatively recommend pretending that `std::erase` (without the `_if`
suffix) does not exist.

In a perfect world, C++20 would simply have added `container::erase_if` member functions to
every STL container type and that's it. My impression is that the only reason they _didn't_ do
that is that WG21 has a long-standing grudge against member functions. The 1990s-era STL
uses member function APIs liberally for things like `list::remove_if`, but anything that wasn't
forced through in the STL's initial rush has been held off for decades.
(C++20 finally added [`set::contains`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/set/contains),
but still doesn't have `vector::contains`.) The _primary_ rationale given in [P1209R0](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2018/p1209r0.html#4.0)
is even sillier than "grudge against member functions": it's "we didn't want to complicate the
layout of the table with which the [then-current] Standard specifies container members."
(Non-member APIs don't have to fit into that table.)

## Erasing all instances of `1` from a container of your own design

By now it should be pretty clear that "erasing from a container" is a very idiosyncratic API.
Different STL containers have radically different APIs for erasure,
and even C++20's `std::erase`/`std::erase_if` is a thin shim that fails to unify
anything beyond the STL's closed set of container types and also fails to deliver
O(lg n) performance on the most common associative containers.

So it continues to be important for C++ programmers to know the two classic STL idioms
to erase from containers: the erase-remove idiom (for non-list sequence containers)
and the `it = container.erase(it)` idiom (for lists and associative containers).
You'll need these idioms in C++17 for sure; and you'll need them in C++20 whenever you deal with
containers other than the STL ones. There is no `std::erase_if` for the Boost containers,
for example.

> Ah, so should I maybe treat `erase_if` as an ADL customization point?

The papers that proposed `std::erase_if` ([N4009](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2014/n4009.htm),
[P1209](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2018/p1209r0.html))
don't say anything about ADL, neither pro nor con. My own take is
"no, you should never treat _anything_ as an ADL customization point if you can help it —
with the grandfathered-in exception of `swap`." If you want your own type to have an `erase_if`
API, you should make it a proper public member function _of the type_.
When writing generic code, you should not assume that any other type author
acts differently from how you would act; so, you shouldn't assume that
any other type author is going to implement a non-member `erase_if`.

(But, if you go against my advice and do make ADL calls to `erase_if`, at least notice
that you should not use the "[`std::swap` two-step](/blog/2020/07/11/the-std-swap-two-step)."
With `swap`, and also with
[`begin`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/iterator/begin),
[`size`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/iterator/size),
[`data`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/iterator/data),
and the rest of C++17's ill-advised customization points, it's reasonable
to fall back on the generic template in `namespace std` when ADL finds nothing better.
For `erase_if`, there _is_ no such generic template on which to fall back.)

## Verdicts on `std::erase_if`

`std::erase` and `std::erase_if` are clearly beneficial if you
are writing generic code to handle an _unknown sequence container_ — i.e., you know it's
`vector`, `deque`, or `list`, but you don't know which. In that case, `std::erase`
will never be slower than the erase-remove idiom, and (for `list` specifically)
may be an improvement.

`std::erase` does not exist for associative containers, because it would be confusing
if `erase(container, hawaii)` and `container.erase(hawaii)` had different behaviors.

For the associative containers, you might prefer using `std::erase_if` over
open-coding the `it = container.erase(it)` idiom. On the other hand, `it = container.erase(it)`
is generic code that will work for a wider variety of containers, including your own;
`std::erase_if` is a convenience function provided only for the STL's closed collection
of containers.
