---
layout: post
title: '_Cratylus_ on choosing good names'
date: 2021-07-15 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  cppnow
  etymology
  library-design
  litclub
  old-shit
---

I was just reading [Plato's _Cratylus_](https://archive.org/details/dialoguesofplat01plat/page/323/mode/1up)
(see also [its Stanford Encyclopedia article](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato-cratylus/)).
In it, (Plato's version of) Socrates talks about choosing good names:

> [Having rejected Protagoras' extreme relativism and admitted the
> existence of a more or less objective reality...]
>
> SOC. Then actions, also, are done according to their proper nature,
> and not according to our opinion of them? In cutting, for example,
> we do not cut as we please, and with any chance instrument; but we cut
> with the proper instrument only, and according to the natural process
> of cutting; and the natural process is right and will succeed, but
> any other will fail and be of no use at all.
>
> HERM. I should say that the natural way is the right way.
>
> SOC. Again, in weaving, not every way is the right way; but the right way
> is the natural way, and the right instrument the natural instrument.
>
> HERM. True. [...And speech is a kind of action.]
>
> SOC. And will a man speak correctly who speaks as he pleases?
> Will not the successful speaker rather be he who speaks in the natural
> way of speaking, and as things ought to be spoken, and with the natural
> instrument? Any other mode of speaking will result in error and failure.
>
> HERM. I quite agree with you.
>
> SOC. And is not naming a part of speaking?
>
> HERM. That is true.
>
> SOC. Then the argument would lead us to infer that names
> ought to be given according to a natural process, and with a proper instrument,
> and not at our pleasure: in this and no other way shall we name with success.
>
> HERM. I agree.
>
> SOC. But again, that which is woven has to be woven with something?
>
> HERM. Yes; with a shuttle.
>
> SOC. And that which is pierced has to be pierced with something?
>
> HERM. Yes; with an awl.
>
> SOC. And that which has to be named has to be named with something?
>
> HERM. Yes; with a name.
>
> SOC. Very good: then a name is an instrument?
>
> HERM. Yes.
>
> SOC. Suppose that I ask, "What sort of instrument is a shuttle?"
> And you answer, "A weaving instrument."
>
> HERM. Well?
>
> SOC. And I ask again, "What do we do when we weave?"
> The answer is that we separate or disengage the warp from the woof.
>
> HERM. Very true.
>
> SOC. And may not a similar description be given of an awl, and of instruments in general?
>
> HERM. To be sure.
>
> SOC. And now suppose that I ask a similar question about names:
> Regarding the name as an instrument, what do we do when we name?
> Do we not give information to one another,
> and distinguish things according to their natures?
>
> HERM. Certainly we do.
>
> SOC. Then a name is an instrument of teaching and of distinguishing natures,
> as the shuttle is of distinguishing the threads of the web.
>
> HERM. Yes.
>
> SOC. And the shuttle is the instrument of the weaver?
>
> HERM. Assuredly.
>
> SOC. Then to use a shuttle well, means to use it like a weaver.
> And to use a name well, means to use it like a teacher.

This might be a good time to plug my C++Now 2021 video
["When Should You Give Two Things the Same Name?"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OQgFEkgKx2s)
