---
layout: post
title: "What are X-macros?"
date: 2021-02-01 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  adventure
  c++-learner-track
  hyperrogue
  preprocessor
excerpt: |
  "X-macros" is a neat C and C++ technique that doesn't get enough advertisement.
  Here's the basic idea:

  Suppose we have a table of similar records, each with the same schema.
  In games, this might be our collection of monster types (each with a display name,
  a representative icon, a dungeon level, a bitmask of special attack types, etc).
  In networking, this might be our collection of error codes (each with
  an integer value, a message string, etc).

  We _could_ encode that information into a data structure that we traverse
  at runtime to produce interesting effects — for example, an array of structs
  that we index into or loop over to answer a question like "What is the error string for
  this enumerator?" or "How many monsters have dungeon level 3?".

  But the "X-macros" technique is to encode that information
  in _source code_, which can be manipulated at _compile time_.
  We encode the information generically, without worrying about
  how it might be "stored" at runtime, because we're not going to
  store it — it's just source code!
---

"X-macros" is a neat C and C++ technique that doesn't get enough advertisement.
Here's the basic idea:

Suppose we have a table of similar records, each with the same schema.
In games, this might be our collection of monster types (each with a display name,
a representative icon, a dungeon level, a bitmask of special attack types, etc).
In networking, this might be our collection of error codes (each with
an integer value, a message string, etc).

We _could_ encode that information into a data structure that we traverse
at runtime to produce interesting effects — for example, an array of structs
that we index into or loop over to answer a question like "What is the error string for
this enumerator?" or "How many monsters have dungeon level 3?".

But the "X-macros" technique is to encode that information
in _source code_, which can be manipulated at _compile time_.
We encode the information generically, without worrying about
how it might be "stored" at runtime, because we're not going to
store it — it's just source code! We encode it something like this:

    // in file "errorcodes.h"
    X(EPERM,  1, "Operation not permitted")
    X(ENOENT, 2, "No such file or directory")
    X(ESRCH,  3, "No such process")
    X(EINTR,  4, "Interrupted system call")

    // in file "monsters.h"
    X(dwarf,     'h', 2, ATK_HIT,  0)
    X(kobold,    'k', 2, ATK_HIT,  IMM_POISON)
    X(elf,       '@', 3, ATK_HIT,  0)
    X(centipede, 'c', 3, ATK_BITE, 0)
    X(orc,       'o', 4, ATK_HIT,  IMM_POISON)

Now we've got a header file that encodes _in source code_ all the data
you might want about your error codes, or monsters, or whatever.
If you need an enumeration type for your monsters, that's easy to whip up:

    enum Monster {
    #define X(name,b,c,d,e) MON_##name,
    #include "monsters.h"
    #undef X
    };

    Monster example = MON_centipede;

Instead of array indexing, X-macros push you toward `switch` as your
fundamental building block:

    bool is_immune_to_poison(Monster m) {
        switch (m) {
    #define X(name,b,c,d,imm) case MON_##name: return (imm == IMM_POISON);
    #include "monsters.h"
    #undef X
        }
    }

Instead of looping over the whole collection (say, from `MON_first` to `MON_last`),
X-macros push you toward writing straight-line code that unrolls the loop:

    int count_monsters_of_level(int target_level) {
        int sum = 0;
    #define X(a,b,level,d,e) sum += (level == target_level);
    #include "monsters.h"
    #undef X
        return sum;
    }

Or even this:

    int number_of_monster_types() {
        return 0
    #define X(a,b,c,d,e) +1
    #include "monsters.h"
    #undef X
        ;
    }

## Variations, upsides, downsides

The name "X-macros" comes from the stereotypical name of the macro in question; but of
course the macro doesn't have to be named `X`. In fact, at least two of the examples below
use multiple macros (for different kinds of data records) intermixed in the same file.

A few commenters on this post have shown a variation on this technique, which is also
reproduced (more or less) on the relatively low-quality
[Wikipedia page on X-macros](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=X_Macro&oldid=998563189):

    // in file "monsters.h"
    #pragma once
    #define LIST_OF_MONSTERS(X) \
    X(dwarf, 'h', 2, ATK_HIT, 0) \
    X(kobold, 'k', 2, ATK_HIT, IMM_POISON) \
    X(elf, '@', 3, ATK_HIT, 0) \
    X(centipede, 'c', 3, ATK_BITE, 0) \
    X(orc, 'o', 4, ATK_HIT, IMM_POISON)

    // in the caller's code
    #include "monsters.h"
    #define X_IMM_POISON(name,b,c,d,imm) case MON_##name: return (imm == IMM_POISON);
    bool is_immune_to_poison(Monster m) {
        switch (m) {
            LIST_OF_MONSTERS(X_IMM_POISON)
        }
    }

I suppose one advantage of this variation is that it makes "monsters.h"
[idempotent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence).
This lets you put the `#include` directive up at the top of the caller's file,
next to `#include <stdio.h>` and so on.
A big disadvantage (or so I would think) is that by putting the whole
list into the macro expansion of `LIST_OF_MONSTERS`, you're probably harming
the quality of error messages and debug info you'll get, and may even overwhelm
your compiler's internal limit on the size of a macro expansion. You also have to
come up with a name for the macro `LIST_OF_MONSTERS`, and make sure it never collides
with anything in the entire rest of your codebase. (In the original, there
are no global names: the name `X` never leaks outside the immediate context of "monsters.h").
You also have to remember to type all those backslashes in "monsters.h".
Personally, I would avoid this variation.

It occurs to me that this variation is to my preferred variation more or less
as a named function is to a lambda-expression.

----

A downside of the technique (either variation) is that each user of "monsters.h" must
know the arity of `X`. If we decide that each monster also needs a boolean flag
for intelligence, then not only do we have to change "monsters.h" to set that flag
for each monster—

    // in file "monsters.h"
    X(dwarf,     'h', 2, ATK_HIT,  0,          true)
    X(kobold,    'k', 2, ATK_HIT,  IMM_POISON, true)
    X(elf,       '@', 3, ATK_HIT,  0,          true)
    X(centipede, 'c', 3, ATK_BITE, 0,          false)
    X(orc,       'o', 4, ATK_HIT,  IMM_POISON, true)

—but we also have to change every single call-site to add a sixth parameter to the
definition of `X`, even if it's irrelevant to most callers:

    bool is_immune_to_poison(Monster m) {
        switch (m) {
    #define X(name,b,c,d,imm,f) case MON_##name: return (imm == IMM_POISON);
    #include "monsters.h"
    #undef X
        }
    }

If this had used a lookup in a runtime data structure,
like `return (monsters[m].imm == IMM_POISON)`,
then we could have added an "intelligence" field to the monster schema
without needing a source-code change here.

----

Another downside is that if you have a _lot_ — say, thousands — of data records,
then X-macros will lead you to write a lot of "unrolled loops" consisting of
thousands of C++ statements. The compiler might struggle to deal with these.
See for example
["The surprisingly high cost of static-lifetime constructors"](/blog/2018/06/26/cost-of-static-lifetime-constructors/) (2018-06-26).


## Examples of X-macros in real code

My (incomplete) port of Luckett & Pike's _Adventure II_ uses X-macros
in ["locs.h"](https://github.com/Quuxplusone/Advent/blob/ea27c76/ODWY0440/locs.h),
included three times from ["adv440.c"](https://github.com/Quuxplusone/Advent/blob/ea27c76/ODWY0440/adv440.c#L629).
This was a hack to get the game to fit into the Z-machine's memory, which has very little space
for native C data such as arrays of `char`, but essentially infinite space for text if all you're doing
is printing it out. So I used X-macros here to rewrite a few trivial but
space-hogging functions of the form

    puts(places[loc].short_desc);

into tedious-looking, but extremely space-efficient, switch tables of the form

    switch (loc) {
        case R_ROAD: puts("You're at the end of the road again."); break;
        case R_HILL: puts("You're at the hill in road."); break;
        case R_HOUSE: puts("You're inside the building."); break;
        ...
    }

----

NetHack uses a variation on X-macros in ["artilist.h"](https://github.com/NetHack/NetHack/blob/0c3b964/include/artilist.h);
the variation is that "artilist.h" itself checks to see where it's being included from and
will define `A` appropriately for that includer, instead of making the includer define `A`
themselves.

----

HyperRogue uses X-macros for its monsters, items, and terrain, in ["content.cpp"](https://github.com/zenorogue/hyperrogue/blob/f95ef39/content.cpp);
you can see some of the ways it's included from ["classes.cpp"](https://github.com/zenorogue/hyperrogue/blob/992c44c7/classes.cpp#L481)
and ["landlock.cpp"](https://github.com/zenorogue/hyperrogue/blob/992c44c7/landlock.cpp#L33).

----

[This StackOverflow question from 2011](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6635851/real-world-use-of-x-macros)
gives some more examples of X-macro usage in the real world.
