---
layout: post
title: "Underseeding `mt19937`; introducing `xoshiro256ss`"
date: 2021-11-23 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  antipatterns
  pearls
  random-numbers
---

TLDR: `std::mt19937` is half the speed of a good PRNG (and 500 times slower to seed,
for what that's worth).
These days I copy-and-paste [xoshiro256ss.h](https://github.com/Quuxplusone/Xoshiro256ss)
when I need random numbers for a project.

The immediate impetus for this post comes from Melissa O'Neill's
blog post ["C++ Seeding Surprises"](https://www.pcg-random.org/posts/cpp-seeding-surprises.html)
(April 2015). That post is six years old, but just the other day
Dimitrij Mijoski discovered a bug in its code: Melissa's post had
claimed that these two snippets (which both underseed `std::mt19937`
by initializing it with only 32 bits of entropy) had identical effects,
when in fact they don't.

    // #1
    std::random_device rdev;
    uint32_t random_seed = rdev();
    std::seed_seq seeder{random_seed};
    std::mt19937 my_rng(seeder);
    if (my_rng() == 7) ~~~

    // #2
    std::mt19937 my_rng(std::random_device{}());
    if (my_rng() == 7) ~~~

Snippet #1 never produces `7` as its first output; but snippet #2 sometimes does.
(For example, when `rdev()` returns 1080100664: [Godbolt.](https://godbolt.org/z/eM7xaKxas))
To determine that snippet #1 never produces `7`, you basically have to run it exhaustively
for every 32-bit value from 0 to 4294967295. On my machine, that snippet takes 20 microseconds
per iteration, which means 4.3 billion iterations takes just about 24 hours.

The standard `std::seed_seq` is basically a thin wrapper around `std::vector<int>`, so
creating a `seed_seq` (as in snippet #1) requires heap traffic. Snippet #2 eliminates the
heap traffic, which makes it run much faster, at about 1.2 microseconds per iteration.
Snippet #2 can iterate all 4.3 billion possible seeds in about 90 minutes. (Which reveals
that snippet #2 never produces `42` as its first output.)

But the real offender here is the Mersenne Twister itself. The point of Melissa's original
post is that both of these snippets "under-seed" `std::mt19937` with only 32 bits of
entropy (so it's totally unsurprising that many values never appear as the engine's first
output) — and unfortunately it's much easier to under-seed `mt19937` than to seed it
correctly. To seed it correctly, you need to provide 624 32-bit words' worth of entropy.
([There is no API](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/35935895/how-can-i-know-the-correct-size-of-a-stdseed-seq)
for computing the number 624 from within C++; you "just have to know.")

Seeding the Mersenne Twister is slow... and pulling random numbers out of it is _also_ slow,
because it has that huge internal state to update.

    static_assert(sizeof(std::mt19937) == 5000);

This discussion reminded me that about six months back, I'd switched some of my hobby
projects (notably [Buddhabrot](/blog/2021/07/27/buddhabrot/) and
[Knuth's elevator simulator](https://github.com/Quuxplusone/KnuthElevator))
away from `std::mt19937` to a fast random number generator known as
[Xoshiro256**](https://prng.di.unimi.it/) (Sebastiano Vigna and David Blackman, 2018).
I took Vigna and Blackman's code, translated it from C to C++, and put the
resulting 50-line snippet on GitHub so I'd always have it handy to copy and paste.

* [Quuxplusone/Xoshiro256ss on GitHub](https://github.com/Quuxplusone/Xoshiro256ss)

`xoshiro256ss` has an internal state of only four 64-bit words, so it is _much_ faster
to seed and to generate from. Substituting `xoshiro256ss` for `mt19937`, we can test
snippet #2 above:

    xoshiro256ss my_rng(std::random_device{}());
    if (my_rng() == 7) ~~~

and blaze through all 4.3 billion seeds in _eight seconds._

Here's a QuickBench — [libc++](https://quick-bench.com/q/SlPoIINQrXt4uZOzgsrX-RjW7Dc),
[libstdc++](https://quick-bench.com/q/cFd5QuCe1dMa9VHW49AwOoeuhYk) — showing the time
to seed `mt19937` versus `xoshiro256ss`. The latter is several hundred times faster;
and even 50% faster than the linear congruential generator in `std::default_random_engine`.

Keep in mind:

- In this post we are unrealistically emphasizing the performance of _seeding_,
    which a good program does only once, over the performance of _generating output_,
    which a program will do many more times. (This is unsurprising, because
    our original motivation was to prove something about underseeding by
    exhaustively testing all 32-bit seeds.)
    But, for the record, `xoshiro256ss` is also markedly faster at generating output
    than `std::mt19937` ([QuickBench](https://quick-bench.com/q/zopXiKjSDnta4Uz3t88Dp2O7OH0)).

- Switching PRNGs doesn't magically fix underseeding.
    We are still giving `xoshiro256ss` only 32 bits of entropy
    when it really wants 256 bits. (Seeding `xoshiro256ss` according to snippet #2,
    as above, will _also_ never produce `7` as the engine's first output. You have
    to set some high bits to get a `7`; for example, seeding with `0x2'0f1d46b1`
    will produce a first output of `0x5827a259'00000007`.)

You might call underseeding a problem; but really, I think of it as a universal constant,
given the current state of the language. Given the current library APIs, programmers
simply _are_ going to underseed their PRNGs by passing in small (32-bit or 64-bit) seeds.
So we have two independent lines of attack here:

- WG21 ought to make seeding a PRNG easier to do properly than improperly.
    [P0205R0 "Allow Seeding Random Number Engines with `std::random_device`"](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0205r0.html#sec-proposed-solution)
    (Moritz Klammler, 2016) proposed the obvious syntax `std::mt19937 g(std::random_device{});`
    to mean "hey PRNG, please seed yourself appropriately from this source of
    seed material." It is not clear to me whether [P0205R1](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2021/p0205r1.html)
    (2021) has preserved this simple syntax. If it hasn't, then it's already broken.

- In the meantime, _given_ that you're going to seed your PRNG with a relatively
    small amount of entropy, you might as well use a PRNG that has good performance
    characteristics.
    `std::mt19937` is the worst possible default if you care about performance
    (which you do, if you're using random numbers for Monte Carlo simulation
    or anything of that nature). Saying "oh, but `mt19937` has a big state space!"
    is irrelevant if you're underseeding it anyway.

In my own hobby projects, I've taken to using
[Quuxplusone/Xoshiro256ss](https://github.com/Quuxplusone/Xoshiro256ss)
in lieu of `std::mt19937`.
