---
layout: post
title: "C++ Pub Quiz at CppCon 2021, Game Two"
date: 2021-10-29 00:01:00 +0000
tags:
  conferences
  cppcon
---

Last night I emceed Game 2 of CppCon 2021's "C++ Pub Quiz."
This time, five teams participated, and the results were again pretty close:
In first place, the ironically named Team Dead Weight with 29.5 points,
followed by `decltype([](){})` at 28 and the Metaprogrammers at 27.
Thanks also to the Leftovers and the Abominable Types.

There was some doubt as to whether the `decltype([](){})` who played
in Round 1 should really be considered the same team as the
`decltype([](){})` who played in Round 2, or whether it should be
considered a new unique team in each round. However, ultimately,
no diagnostic was given.

Remember [last year's](/blog/2020/09/18/cppcon-2020-pub-quiz-2/) brainstorm round,
in which the scores (out of a possible 14 points) ranged from 9 down to −3?
This year's brainstorm round was:

> In the C++20 standard library, there are exactly 12 identifiers "foo"
> such that the library provides both `std::foo` and `std::is_foo`.
> Name as many of these identifiers as you can. For example, you can
> all go ahead and write "`swappable`" as your first answer, because
> C++20 provides both the concept `std::swappable` and the type-trait
> `std::is_swappable`. Your score for this round will be the number of
> names you give correctly, minus the number you give incorrectly (if any).

The five teams' scores for this round ranged from 4 to −4. Can you do better?

Another noteworthy question:

> Write a translation unit containing a class type `C`, such that
> `is_empty_v<C>` is `true`, and yet `sizeof(C)` is greater than 1.

No team used the approach that I had had in mind, but several teams
won points by taking an alternative (yet valid) approach I hadn't thought of!

----

Thanks to all the pub quizzers for making C++ Pub Quiz a success —
and of course thanks to Herb Sutter, Jon Kalb, and everyone behind
the scenes for making CppCon in general a success this year.

----

See also:

* ["C++ Pub Quiz at CppCon 2019"](/blog/2019/09/21/cppcon-2019-pub-quiz/) (2019-09-21)
* ["C++ Pub Quiz at CppCon 2020, Game One"](/blog/2020/09/16/cppcon-2020-pub-quiz/) (2020-09-16)
* ["C++ Pub Quiz at CppCon 2020, Game Two"](/blog/2020/09/18/cppcon-2020-pub-quiz-2/) (2020-09-18)
* ["C++ Pub Quiz at CppCon 2021, Game One"](/blog/2021/10/28/cppcon-2021-pub-quiz/) (2021-10-28)
